On a more exciting day than usual in Times Square, two taxicabs collided on Sunday morning, sending one of them spinning into a crowd, while in the afternoon a large pane of glass fell several stories from a building and crashed onto the sidewalk.

Six pedestrians suffered minor injuries in the car accident. There were no injuries from the falling glass, according to the police.

Shortly before 9:30 a.m., Hafiz Ishaq was driving his cab south on Broadway, taking two passengers to Pennsylvania Station. As he crossed 44th Street, he said later, a cab driving east struck his vehicle. Mr. Ishaq said his car spun clockwise several times onto the pedestrian median separating Broadway and Seventh Avenue and struck a lamppost.

“It was nightmarish beyond belief,” he said.

No arrests were made or citations issued.

Six people were taken to Bellevue Hospital Center to be treated for minor injuries, the police said.

Mr. Ishaq said that some of the injured were children. “I peeked over and saw a little angel face lying on the ground,” he said.

Mr. Ishaq headed to Bellevue shortly after the accident to see how the victims were doing.

“The scream echoes in my ears,” he said. “I just wanted to pay my respects to the family.”

As he sat in the waiting area of the pediatric emergency room, a smiling woman introduced herself as the mother of a boy injured in the accident.

“So far, everything looks O.K.,” she told him, and asked him to come meet her son. “The first thing my son asked was if you were O.K. He wanted to know if the taxi driver was O.K.”

Just after 2 p.m., at 1 Times Square, where the ball drops every New Year’s Eve, a 3-foot-by-5-foot windowpane fell several stories to the sidewalk, city officials said.

The accident occurred less than a week after a 1,500-pound glass panel fell more than 50 stories from the Bank of America building at 42nd Street and Avenue of the Americas and shattered on the metal roof of a pedestrian passageway. Two people suffered minor injuries.

On Sunday, the police closed the area in Times Square where the windowpane landed to vehicle and pedestrian traffic as they cleared away the shards of glass.

A spokeswoman from the Department of Buildings said that a preliminary investigation found that the pane had become dislodged and had fallen from between the seventh and eighth floors. The Buildings Department issued a citation to the owner of the building, Jamestown One Times Square, that documents the accident but carries no penalty, she said.

Onlookers using still and video cameras stood on the street corners near the building.

“They’re making a big deal out of not much,” said Fasil Yilma, a retail manager from Manhattan.

Some people seemed disappointed by the lack of drama.

“I thought maybe somebody was stuck or somebody was going to jump,” said Bernadette Wilson, a nurse from Harlem. “All this commotion for what?”