The rent is getting so hard to pay that Maricela Soto can barely afford her favorite green bell peppers at the supermarket. “Soon,” she said in Spanish, “I’m just going to have start eating chicken and forget about the rest.”

Ms. Soto is unemployed and severely disabled, and she says she has suffered mental stress because she is worried that she will not be able to pay her rent.

She has grown accustomed to writing the monthly check for $721.56 for her rent-stabilized apartment in Inwood, in northern Manhattan. But come this fall, she, like many low-income tenants in rent-stabilized homes, is likely to be hit with a higher-than-expected increase.

The city’s Rent Guidelines Board, which regulates rent for New York City’s one million rent-stabilized apartments, approved the highest rent increases in years on Thursday. The board authorized increases of up to 4.5 percent on one-year leases and 8.5 percent on two-year leases.

The board also took the unusual step of authorizing a supplemental rent increase that affected only tenants who have lived in their apartments for six years or more.

Owners of buildings with those tenants have the option of charging them the approved increases or a $45 monthly increase for one-year leases or $85 for two-year leases, whichever is greater. Ms. Soto, who has been in her apartment for 12 years, could face either increase.

Dozens of tenants and tenant advocates who gathered on the steps of City Hall on Sunday morning to protest the increases, saying they unfairly affect seniors and working families. Landlords acknowledged that the increases would be difficult for some renters, but said that they were needed to make up for rising operating costs.

For some tenants, the increases, which will apply to leases renewed between Oct. 1, 2008, and Sept. 30, 2009, will mean cutting back on groceries and gas. Others said they might be forced to move out.

Ms. Soto, 54, and her husband, 77, both immigrants from the Dominican Republic, receive about $1,200 per month from Social Security. Her husband is retired, and she is unable to work because of back problems and numb hands.

They already have difficulty paying the rent for their two-bedroom apartment. Ms. Soto said that she often travels far from home to buy the things she needs on sale, in order to save every cent possible. In light of Thursday’s approved increases, she said, she tries not to dwell on the prospects. “I’m still in shock,” she said. “My mind is not clear.”

Other tenants were similarly taken aback. Manuela Ceballos, a single mother who has lived in her Inwood apartment for 17 years and pays $1,200 each month, said her budget, too, is already strained. She wondered how she would provide for her three children and pay for her 17-year-old son to go to college in the fall.

“How am I going to survive? How am I going to pay?” said Ms. Ceballos, a parent coordinator at school.

Another Inwood resident, Albania Lopez, said she had canceled her planned summer vacation to the Poconos and worried whether she would be able to continue to pay for English and math tutoring for her two daughters. She said her family might ultimately be forced to find a new place to live. “Any little bit is going to affect our daily lives because we’re already behind,” she said. “The city is just not sensitive to our community.”

Joseph Strasburg, president of the Rent Stabilization Association, which represents thousands of landlords, said that owners have faced their own rising costs. He said that those include higher sewer and water usage rates and real estate taxes. The rent increases would help landlords keep up, he said.

“The real difficulty is that we do realize that there is going to be a level of hardship imposed on low-income tenants,” he said. “The other difficulty is that some small property owners are also suffering.”

Mr. Strasburg suggested that the city look for other ways to help both sides.

Tenants were upset by the swiftness of the board’s approval of the increases and what they called a lack of public involvement. The supplemental increase was not part of a range of increases approved in May, and a memorandum describing it was distributed to board members on Thursday morning.

City Councilman Miguel Martinez, a Manhattan Democrat, said advocates were seeking ways to help evicted tenants find aid through city programs, and were considering challenging the Rent Guidelines Board’s handling of the increases.

Tenants said they hoped the new fees would somehow fall through. Ms. Soto said she was depressed about what her future may hold. Sometimes, she said, she wakes up in the night crying, not knowing whether she will be able to stay in her home.

“I don’t know how I’ll deal with it,” she said. “I don’t have peace and calm anymore.”