Wholesale prices in the United States increased only slightly in October, the Labor Department said Tuesday, easing concerns that inflation might soon emerge as a threat to the economic recovery in a period of extraordinarily low interest rates.

A separate report on industrial production showed weaknesses in the manufacturing sector, which is grappling with tepid consumer demand. The stock markets, meanwhile, rose slightly. Higher oil prices lifted energy stocks, and trading volume remained light.

David M. Darst, chief investment strategist for Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, said investors took the mixed signals on the economic data in stride.

“It’s a two-steps-forward, one-step-back type of environment,” he said. “Many people have worried inflation will snap back with a vengeance, but there still seems to be so much global overcapacity that in the short term we can focus on the play at hand.”

The Dow Jones industrial average rose 30.46, or 0.3 percent, to 10,437.42. The broader Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index gained 1.02, or 0.1 percent, to 1,110.32, while the Nasdaq rose 5.93, or 0.3 percent, to 2,203.78.

The Labor Department’s wholesale prices report said that higher food and energy costs contributed to a seasonally adjusted 0.3 percent rise in the producer price index, which measures the cost of goods to companies. That fell short of the 0.5 percent jump economists had forecast.

The index factors in the cost of items like gasoline, food and construction materials to businesses. It is often considered a leading indicator of consumer inflation because it monitors changes in prices before products reach store shelves.

The data showed a 1.6 percent increase in energy prices in October, driven by higher prices for gasoline and electricity. Food prices, particularly fresh and dried vegetables, also increased 1.6 percent.

Excluding food and energy costs, which tend to be volatile, the price of goods to businesses fell 0.6 percent in October.

Inflation has been a chief concern of policy makers as the government tries to revive the economy by keeping interest rates extremely low and pumping billions of dollars into the economy. At the same time, the dollar has fallen to 15-month lows, stoking fears about inflation arising from higher prices for imports.

Even as the Labor Department’s numbers suggested inflation was under control, some economists said that was only because high unemployment and unused factory capacity had kept inflationary pressures in check.

While the price of finished goods remained steady, Dan Greenhaus, chief economic strategist for Miller Tabak, said that the price of crude goods, those in the earliest stages of production, increased in an indication that some inflation might be in the pipeline.

“There is little doubt that over the last few months, inflation has picked up in the economy,” Mr. Greenhaus said. “But we’re nowhere near concerns about a crazy outbreak.”

Many analysts say they expect the Fed to keep interest rates low for much of next year. A report on the state of manufacturing released Tuesday by the Fed said industrial production rose 0.1 percent in October, falling short of the 0.4 increase projected by Wall Street analysts. Manufacturing output fell 0.1 percent, the first decline in four months.

In September, industrial production increased 0.6 percent.

Gold climbed $2.10 to $1,141.30. The Treasury’s 10-year note rose 3/32, to 100 14/32. The yield fell to 3.32 percent from 3.33 percent late Monday.