 Wall Street wobbled on Tuesday amid indications that the global economy, particularly the banking sector, might be more frail than investors had believed. But positive sales reports from automakers stoked investors' hopes in the final hours of trading.

The day began with the announcement that the Royal Bank of Scotlandwould take billions more in British government aid. In addition, UBS in Switzerland reported another quarter of losses, sending European stocks tumbling.

In the afternoon, automakers including General Motors and Fordreported sales in October had risen by small amounts, while Chrysler's sales had declined 30 percent. The data suggested consumers were still willing to put down money for cars even in the absence of the government's cash-for-clunkers program, which ended in August and provided vouchers toward the purchase of new vehicles.

At the close of the markets, the Dow Jones industrial average was down 17.53 points, or 0.2 percent, to 9,771.91. The Standard and Poor's 500-stock index was up 2.53 points, or 0.2 percent, at 1,045.41, and the technology-heavy Nasdaq composite index was up 8.12 points, or 0.4 percent, at 2,057.32.

Dan Faretta, a senior markets strategist at the brokerage Lind-Waldock, said European concerns raised doubts about the health of American financial institutions, which have suffered in the face of weak revenue and losses on loans.

''Is that what's to come for more banks? Are we going to have to have more stimulus for some of the banks that we have over here?'' Mr. Faretta said.

Adding some optimism, the Commerce Department said Tuesday that orders to United States factories had climbed by 0.9 percent in September, the fifth increase in six months. The data indicated that consumers were hungry for goods of all types, including cars, cigarettes and clothing. The numbers were better than analysts had expected.

Investors also reacted to news that Warren E. Buffett of Berkshire Hathaway would buy Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad for $26 billion. Mr. Buffett called his purchase ''an all-in wager on the economic future of the United States,'' and his investment signaled confidence in transportation and the future of consumer demand.

Burlington Northern's stock climbed 27.5 percent to $97, and other railroad stocks surged.

Despite optimistic earnings reports from major companies in recent weeks, executives are still relying on cost-cutting as they seek to drive up profits. Johnson & Johnson said Tuesday it would shed up to 7 percent of its global work force as part of a plan meant to save the company $1.4 billion to $1.7 billion by 2011.

Mining companies rose, following precious metals prices. The price of gold rose $24.90, to a record $1,084.40 an ounce, following news that India had purchased 200 metric tons from the International Monetary Fund.

Barrick Gold rose $2.66, about 7 percent, to $39.17. Newmont Mining also rose about 7 percent, closing at $46.48, up $2.91.

The focus this week is on labor and the Federal Reserve. The Fed meets Wednesday to assess the economy and set monetary policy and on Friday, unemployment figures come out.

The Treasury's 10-year note fell 13/32, to 101 10/32. The yield rose to 3.47 percent, from 3.41 percent late Monday.

