Wall Street stocks fell on Thursday as investors reacted with caution to a drop in the price of oil. An announcement by President Obama of a job creation initiative failed to motivate investors.

They dumped shares of oil stocks after the Energy Information Administration said that large amounts of petroleum were going unused as businesses and consumers reduced their use of oil. The report said refineries had eased production to the lowest levels since September 2008. As a result, oil fell to $76.64 a barrel, down from $79.28 on Wednesday.

President Obama, speaking at the White House before departing for a weeklong tour of Asia, announced that he would convene a summit meeting in December to examine the state of unemployment. Mr. Obama said he was open to any “demonstrably good idea” that would spur job growth.

“We have an obligation to consider every additional responsible step we can to encourage and accelerate job creation in this country,” he said.

In response, shares on Wall Street made modest gains early but spent most of the day in retreat. At the close of trading, the Dow Jones industrial average was down 93.79 points, or 0.91 percent, at 10,197.47. The broader Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index was down 11.27 points, or 1.03 percent, at 1,087.24 and the Nasdaq composite index fell 17.88 points, or 0.83 percent, at 2,149.02.

“There isn’t enough conviction there to slough off a bad economic number,” said Uri D. Landesman, head of global growth at ING Investment Management. “There really is significant debate and disagreement over what the rate of improvement of the economy is going to be.”

The day began when the Labor Department announced that new filings for unemployment insurance dropped last week to a seasonally adjusted 502,000, from an upwardly revised 514,000 the previous week.

While the broader economy has shown signs of health since the near collapse of the financial system last year, the United States has continued to grapple with high levels of unemployment. Last month, the unemployment rate reached 10.2 percent, a 26-year high.

Shares of Advanced Micro Devices shares surged after Intel said it would pay A.M.D. $1.25 billion to settle antitrust and patent disputes. A.M.D.’s stock climbed 21.8 percent to $6.48, while Intel shares fell by 0.8 percent.

Other technology stocks also rose. Hewlett-Packard’s announcement on Wednesday that it would acquire 3Com, a provider of computer network equipment, for $2.7 billion sent 3Com’s stock up 31.1 percent, though H.P. declined 0.6 percent.

The dollar, which had dropped to a 15-month low on Wednesday, showed signs of strengthening. At the market’s close, it was trading at slightly more than $1.48 against the euro, which could explain some of the drops in stock prices as investors redirected their funds to currency markets in hopes of strong returns.

Wal-Mart, the nation’s largest retailer, reported on Thursday that its third-quarter profit had risen 3.2 percent from the previous year, though sales at stores open at least a year fell 0.4 percent. Its stock rose modestly on Wednesday, but analysts said its report still raised questions about how much consumers would spend this holiday season.

Quincy Krosby, a markets strategist at Prudential Financial, said that the market was still hesitant and that investors expected a significant upturn when the S.& P. 500 reached the 1,100-point threshold. That level is significant, she said, because it would be a return to the days before the financial crisis and could motivate skeptical traders on the sidelines to enter the market.

“This is more of a struggle in the market, an inflection point, as to whether or not investors see the push toward the end of the year having any ammunition,” she said. “It’s psychological. Investors will go in regardless of whether they believe the fundamentals of the economy are strong.”

European stocks were mixed, with the DAX in Germany down 0.1 percent, the CAC in France down 0.2 percent, and the FTSE in Britain up 0.2 percent.

The Treasury’s 10-year note rose 10/32, to 99 13/32. The yield fell to 3.44 percent, from 3.47 percent late Tuesday.

