Troy N. Smith Sr., who turned ordering a hamburger by speaking into a microphone from a parked car into a national habit, died last Monday in Oklahoma City, Okla. He was 87.

His death was announced by the Sonic Corporation, the nationwide chain of drive-in restaurants he founded in 1959.

As a young man fresh out of the United States military, Mr. Smith turned somebody else’s trifle of an idea into an enterprise. One day, while driving along the Texas-Louisiana border, he grew giddy at the sight of a fast-food joint with a car-to-kitchen intercom. He asked the owners for a replica of the audio system, and he soon made it the centerpiece of his root beer stand in Shawnee, Okla.

Families, delighted by both the efficiency and absurdity of using a tiny microphone to command milkshakes to the driver’s seat, flocked to the Sonic drive-ins. By the late 1970s, Mr. Smith was operating one of the most successful fast-food chains in the United States; from 1977 to 1978, he broke ground on an average of one location a day, mostly concentrated in the South. Today, the company operates nearly 3,600 locations in 42 states. Bob Blackburn, executive director of the Oklahoma Historical Society and the author of “Sonic: The History of America’s Drive-in” (Cottonwood Publications, 2009), said Mr. Smith’s business model flourished because it came just as Americans began to embrace car culture and recreational eating.

“He came up with a formula that restaurants are a people business,” Mr. Blackburn said. “He defined what it means to be an entrepreneur.”

Troy Nuel Smith Sr. was born in Seminole, Okla., on May 26, 1922. He grew up in the oil patches of east central Oklahoma and in 1943 joined the Army Air Forces. When the war ended, he began work as a milk truck driver.

Mr. Smith found that he did not like to be ordered around, and he decided to leave trucking to become his own boss. He turned his entrepreneurial spirit toward food, opening several restaurants in Shawnee, including a diner called the Cottage Café and an upscale steak house known as the Log House Restaurant.

But it was the Top Hat, a root beer stand that he opened in 1953, that became Mr. Smith’s most lucrative endeavor, consistently yielding a 20 percent profit. He abandoned the other businesses, hoping to capitalize on the growing popularity of drive-in restaurants.

In the 1950s, drive-ins were already a staple of the American fast-food scene. Mr. Smith sought to reinvent them. He added an intercom system that made it possible to deliver food within three minutes; wired each restaurant with speakers to pipe in radio hits; added angular parking to increase privacy; and maintained a fleet of roller-skating carhops, even as other restaurants were cutting back. He came up with a slogan — “Service with the Speed of Sound” — and trademarked the Sonic name in 1959.

Mr. Smith used the franchise model to attract young talent and develop workers into managers. In the early 1980s, however, the bleak economy and concerns about quality forced him to close 300 of his 1,300 restaurants.

Mr. Smith stayed involved in Sonic for most of his life, even though he retired from managing day-to-day operations in 1983; he kept a seat on the board.

Mr. Smith is survived by his wife, Dollie; a daughter, Leslie Baugh; a son, Troy Smith Jr., known as Butch; eight grandchildren; and nine great-grandchildren.

In his business interactions, he was known for chuckling in the face of bad news and greeting colleagues with effusive praise. In September, when he could not appear at a company convention because of his health, he taped a message for company employees, apologizing for not thanking them enough over the years.