Following complaints that the city had neglected to protect workers at Rikers Island from swine flu, the Department of Correction agreed on Thursday to carry out new safety precautions at the jail complex.

One of the jails at Rikers, the Anna M. Kross Center, where 7 of the 10 inmates with confirmed cases of swine flu had been held, will be sanitized. In addition, all inmates leaving the island for court appearances will be screened for the swine flu virus, a deputy commissioner for the department said.

The precautions were announced late Thursday after intense pressure from the correction officers’ union, which had threatened to file suit.

City officials have bristled at advice as they sought to contain the spread of the flu, including a request to shut down the jail from Norman Seabrook, president of the union, the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association. “If he is an epidemiologist,” Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said on Tuesday, “it’s the first time I’ve heard of it.”

The deputy commissioner, Stephen J. Morello, said the decision to put the precautions into effect was made with “abundance of caution and recognizing that we need for our employees to know that we are doing all that we can to minimize the spread of the flu.”

Mr. Morello said that the absentee rate for staff members at the jail did not seem to be unusually high in recent days. He said the department would also deploy teams of medical workers inside the jail complex to consult with staff members and screen for symptoms.

Mr. Seabrook criticized what he said was the reluctance of Correction Department officials to take action to contain the virus at Rikers. “It’s unfortunate that it appears that they don’t have their finger on the pulse as to how serious this disease can potentially become,” he said.

About 1,500 inmates are transported off the island each day to appear in court, Mr. Morello said. They will now be screened before their departure. If a test reveals a probable or positive case of swine flu, the courts will be informed, Mr. Morello said, adding that any inmate with the virus will be isolated at Rikers.

The Kross Center houses nearly 2,600 inmates.

Citywide, 240 people are ill with the flu, and 56 have been hospitalized, according to the city’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.