Home construction slowed unexpectedly in October to the lowest level in six months, the Commerce Department said Wednesday, resurrecting fears that the housing market may be slow to recover.

A worker lays brick outside a home under construction in Leesburg, Virginia, on Thursday. New home construction slowed unexpectedly in October, the government reported.

A separate report showed that consumer prices inched upward in October, but not enough to make inflation a concern even with the dollar weakening and interest rates at record lows.

The data on home construction showed a decline in the rate of single- and multiple-family home building, contributing to an overall decrease of 10.6 percent in housing starts from September. In total, construction was at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 529,000 housing units in October, falling short of the 600,000 predicted by analysts. Building permits, an indicator of future construction, declined as well, to an annual rate of 552,000, from 575,000, also falling short of forecasts.

Apartment construction slowed to a record low, dipping to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 53,000 in October. Analysts attributed the decrease to the reluctance of banks to finance large construction projects and lackluster demand for rentals as vacancies remained abundant.

Part of the overall decline in housing construction might be explained by the uncertainty in October over whether Congress would extend a tax credit for first-time home buyers. This month, lawmakers voted to extend the credit through April, but builders might have been reluctant to begin construction in October without assurance that homes would be bought.

The revival of the housing market is considered crucial to reviving the economy. Construction adds jobs to the economy, and once a home is sold, consumers typically go on spending sprees as they fill it with appliances and furniture.

“These figures can be pretty volatile from month to month, so it may just be a blip,” Paul Ashworth, senior United States economist at Capital Economics, wrote in a research note on Wednesday. “Nevertheless, taken at face value it suggests home builders are still uncertain about the sustainability of the rebound in home sales.”

Celia Chen, senior director at Moody’s Economy.com, said demand for homes would probably remain weak into 2010.

“The housing market is still very fragile,” she said. “It seems that the market has bottomed in terms of sales and starts, but that stability can be easily broken, even if affordability is very high.”

The Labor Department’s report on consumer prices showed that the Consumer Price Index climbed 0.3 percent, above analysts’ estimates of 0.2 percent. The index measures the changes in the cost of a bundle of goods for consumers — things like cooking oil, airplane tickets and medical care.

The increases came because of rising energy and motor vehicle costs, the report said. When the government excluded the cost of food and energy, which can be volatile, prices rose 0.2 percent.

The prices of cars and trucks showed steep increases. Analysts said that could be a side effect of the government’s popular cash-for-clunkers program, which depleted the supply of both cheaper 2009 models and used vehicles, driving up prices.

The small increase in consumer prices signaled that inflationary pressures, by and large, appear to be in check, restrained by the nation’s high unemployment rate and significant unused factory capacity. On Tuesday, a report on wholesale prices showed similar results, though there were signs that higher prices might be on the horizon.

“Effectively, this gives the Federal Reserve a checkered flag to keep rates exceptionally low for an extended period of time,” said Brian Bethune, chief United States financial economist for IHS Global Insight.