It was supposed to be a quiet day on Wall Street: the bond market was closed for Veterans Day, and there were no economic reports on the calendar.

But the news that the dollar had weakened to a 15-month low set off a chain reaction that, by the end of Wednesday, had energized three pillars of the nation’s economy — stocks, gold and oil.

Wall Street indexes climbed higher, led by gains in financial stocks, while the price of gold reached another record and oil prices continued to rise.

The dollar dropped to its lowest level since 2008 and ended the day just below $1.50 against the euro, at $1.4976.

Persistently low interest rates in the United States have meant meager returns for currency traders, who earn more when rates are high, leaving them looking to the booming stock markets for more lucrative payoffs.

Many analysts worry that the eight-month stock rally has exaggerated the health of the broader economy. Indications that wealthy nations like the United States will continue to finance stimulus efforts, however, are luring risk-averse investors back into the stock markets.

On the flip side, the Federal Reserve’s decision to keep interest rates close to zero for what economists predict will be at least six months has left the dollar struggling.

“People want their money in anywhere but dollars right now, whether in commodities, foreign equities or equities themselves,” said Andrew J. Neale, portfolio manager for Fogel Neale Partners.

In Tokyo on Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner said he considered a robust dollar an important part of an economic recovery.

“I believe deeply that it’s very important to the United States, to the economic health of the United States, that we maintain a strong dollar,” Mr. Geithner said, according to news reports.

Some analysts, however, believe that behind closed doors, policy makers in Washington are happy to see a slow and steady depreciation of the dollar. The weak dollar makes American products cheaper overseas, buoying sales, and makes imports more expensive, encouraging consumers at home to buy American.

On Tuesday night, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Richard W. Fisher, seemed to hint at that view, saying the drop in the dollar’s value had not been “disorderly” and that rates were likely to remain low for an extended period, Reuters reported.

“Sentiment is still negative, and the comments of the Federal Reserve have only fanned the flames,” said Marc Chandler, the global head of currency strategy at Brown Brothers Harriman.

As the dollar fell, gold reached $1,117.40 an ounce at the stock market’s close on Wednesday, setting another record high as hedge fund managers and wealthy speculators continued to buy the precious metal.

The Dow Jones industrial average ended trading up 44.29 points, or 0.43 percent, at 10,291.26. The broader Standard and Poor’s 500-stock index rose 5.50 points, or 0.5 percent, to 1,098.51, and the Nasdaq composite index jumped 15.82 points, or 0.74 percent, to 2,166.90. Crude oil settled at $79.28 a barrel, up 23 cents, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.

The zeal from strong trading days in Europe and Asia seemed to help perk up Wall Street. The FTSE 100 in Britain closed 0.69 percent higher, the DAX in Germany climbed by 0.98 percent and the CAC 40 in France increased by 0.76 percent. The Hang Seng in Hong Kong rose by 1.61 percent, while the Nikkei in Japan was flat.

A report from China showed the country’s industrial output and retail sales grew 16 percent from a year earlier, giving investors hope that the global economy was on track for recovery.

As the market continues to rise, many investors have seemed content to ignore signs that consumer spending, which accounts for 70 percent of the United States economy, might not grow at a rapid pace, given the country’s high level of unemployment.

“The consumer is still not spending well,” Mr. Neale said. “Until there’s some sign of strength in the jobless market and housing market, then the consumer will remain on the sidelines.”