 FOR those who suffered through a summer of staycations, Labor Day is presenting plenty of tempting last-minute deals.

The recession has led to a glut of hotel inventory this year, forcing prices down in many vacation destinations. That's making sales easy to find for a last-ditch summer fling. There are $24 rooms in downtown Las Vegas and $178 rates for new hotels in New York. Beach resorts from Hawaii to North Carolina are discounting. And there are still rooms at Grand Canyon park lodges.

Airfares have also dropped, especially to Florida beach resorts. Average fares to Orlando and Fort Lauderdale are down 18 percent to $222 and $208 respectively, according to Bing Travel, the new Microsoft search engine that uses the airfare tracking tools of Farecast. And a recent online search for flights from New York City, departing Thursday, Sept. 4, and returning the next Monday, turned up many round-trip fares for under $300, including Myrtle Beach, S.C., ($155) and Toronto ($287).

There's another incentive to fly somewhere this Labor Day: impending capacity cuts could push fares up this fall. ''Is Labor Day going to be the last hurrah?'' asked Genevieve Shaw Brown, senior editor at Travelocity.com.

Here is a roundup of some of the better deals.

Beach Vacations

Bargains are easy to come by at traditional Labor Day beach resorts.

On a tight budget? The Red Roof Inn motel chain is offering a third night free with discount code 545474 on many already discounted beach destinations. For example, three nights at the Red Roof Inn, Wilmington, N.C., near expansive Wrightsville Beach comes to just $54.44 a night, when the deal is applied at checkout, or $39.99 a night at the Red Roof in Naples, Fla.

At the high end of the hotel spectrum, the Four Seasons Lanai at Manele Bay in Hawaii is offering four nights at the price of three; nightly rates begin at $295 over the Labor Day weekend. Similar deals are being offered at two Miami hotels: the Mandarin Oriental (where rates start at $299 for a skyline view) and the Setai (about $550 a night, roughly half of what it costs in high season).

Some of the best bargains can be found in Mexico, where hotels are still recovering from a sharp downturn in travel following swine flu outbreaks last spring. Hotel rates are down 22 percent in Cancœn compared with last Labor Day weekend, according to Travelocity.com, and average airfare is down 26 percent.

Keep in mind that hurricane season runs through mid-October. Consider travel insurance with hurricane coverage if you decide to snap up a deal in Mexico, Florida or other storm-prone regions.

Urban Escapes

While beaches and campgrounds are popular with Labor Day crowds, cities tend to empty out. Expedia, which is running a Labor Day Sale that includes 207 vacation packages, reports hotel rates are down between 13 and 25 percent in cities like Boston, San Francisco, Seattle and Vancouver. For example, Tourism Vancouver is listing a number of hotels with third-night-free deals including the Fairmont Waterfront from 249 Canadian dollars a night (about $222 at 1.12 Canadian dollars to the U.S. dollar).

Hotwire's Travel-Ticker.com has also pulled together a list of bargains including $74 a night for the King George Hotel in San Francisco, a more than 50 percent cut. And the new discount hotel site Getaroom.comis offering rates from $40 in Orlando, $67 in New Orleans and $99 in Washington. If you book two nights by Aug. 31 you receive a $25 rebate.

Even in New York, not known for hotel bargains, deals abound because of falling demand and a surplus of new hotels. In fact, average room rates in the first full week of August dropped 27.6 percent compared with the same period last year, to $191.90, according to Smith Travel Research, which tracks the industry. This was the largest weekly decrease in 25 major markets the company researches. 

For example, the new Ace Hotel near the Flatiron District had rooms starting at $178, in a recent search on Quikbook.com, an online hotel discounter. Gild Hall near Wall Street was $180 a night, and the Maritime Hotel in Chelsea was $225.

In addition to cheaper hotels, visitors can expect less crowding at stores, more theater seats and more open tables at hot restaurants. In fact, restaurants in New York are so desperate for business that the city extended Restaurant Week -- which offers $24.07 three-course prix-fixe lunches and $35 three-course prix-fixe dinners at top-notch restaurants -- for an additional five weeks through Labor Day.

Europe

Flights to Europe are not the bargain that some have hoped for, but it's still cheaper these days. ''People suffer from flight fixation,'' said Ms. Shaw Brown of Travelocity. ''If you look at the vacation in total and consider the value you can get from the hotel, you might be surprised what you can afford.''

Case in point: A weeklong Barcelona package on Travelocity, which includes the Expo Hotel Barcelona and round-trip airfare from New York, is $925 a person. The flight alone, however, is $609.

That rationale also works in reverse. Aer Lingus, for example, is offering five nights in Ireland, including a room at the Ritz-Carlton, Powerscourt, just south of Dublin, and round-trip airfare from New York, for $799 a person in September. The hotel alone typically starts at 200 euros ($288 at $1.45 to the euro) a night (or about 1,000 euros for five nights).

Globus, which specializes in guided group tours, is offering half off airfare on European river cruise vacations booked by Sept. 1. In a separate promotion, it is offering $100 off United and Lufthansa flights for European city vacations by Aug. 31.

Great Outdoors

It's not too late to find a room at a national park either. Many families are already getting ready for school.

Though popular parks like Yellowstone and Zion are mostly sold out for Labor Day weekend, a recent search on Xanterra.com, an online reservation site for several national parks, showed openings at the Yavapai Lodge near the South Rim of the Grand Canyon for $107 a night, and the Furnace Creek Ranch in Death Valley from $124 a night.

And in Alaska, where fall comes early, Denali Park Resorts is offering a two-night Colors of Denali package from $219 a night that includes a $50 gift card and 500 Alaska Airlines miles.

But don't expect vacancies everywhere. All the lodges overlooking the South Rim of the Grand Canyon, including El Tovar and Bright Angel, have been sold out for weeks. 