MEOW! Do people feel strongly about pets on planes.

In response to the July 19 Practical Traveler column, “Friendly Skies? Not For Pet Owners,” more than 100 readers weighed in on the subject. Many of the comments expressed outrage at the high fees airlines charge to transport pets, especially on international flights. A number of readers also described nightmarish travel experiences involving pets that arrived severely dehydrated or even near death after flying as checked luggage.

But a surprising majority of comments debated whether pets should be allowed on planes in the first place — a discussion worth summarizing here.

Allergy sufferers cited pet dander as a major health issue. “I have no desire to drug myself up with antihistamines and/or sneeze/wheeze endlessly because of another passenger’s selfish decision to bring their pet on the flight,” said a reader who identified herself as Eve from Portland. “It seems inconsistent for airlines to phase out peanuts as snacks but nonetheless allow animals in the cabin, when their mere presence causes severe discomfort for others.”

Allergy sufferers have little recourse if they find themselves seated near a pet. It’s possible to switch seats with another passenger to avoid sneezing through the entire flight, but that isn’t an ideal solution. “When I complained about a cat under my aisle seat in the front of the plane — I was moved to a rear, middle seat,” wrote Catherine from California. “Meds kept me alive but I was sick for a week from the resulting sinus infection.”

Pet owners, on the other hand, pointed out that they have few alternatives when it comes to transporting their animals, whether for a long vacation or a cross-country move. And banning pets because of allergy sufferers, they argue, is a slippery slope. “If airlines are going to start insisting on pet-free flights because of a few hothouse flowers complaining about the possibility of being annoyed by allergies,” a reader identified as HK from New York City asked, “can they also start banning people with colds?” HK continued, “Oh — and I guess they should ban people who wear too much perfume so that I don’t have to suffer a headache throughout the flight, people with sketchy hygiene and people who want to bring pungent foods onboard.”

But passengers had other reasons for wanting to ban pets from planes. Millie Smith, from Boulder, Colo., described how a small dog on a red-eye flight “barked incessantly for about 45 minutes on takeoff and a half hour on landing.”

So what’s wrong with putting pets in cargo? Even a former airline employee said he would not trust an airline with safely transporting his pets as checked luggage. “Knowing what I do about conditions on the ramp and in the baggage compartment, I would never transport my dog by air, no matter what the season,” said Scott from Morgantown, W.Va., “He would be terrified by the noise, the confusion, the isolation and the physical sensations of flight. It would be pure selfishness on my part to subject him to that just so I could take him along on a trip.” And Kay from Eugene, Ore., described how her daughter had to rush her kitten to the veterinarian when it arrived “at the point of death” from dehydration after a flight from Georgia to Arizona.

Some readers offered suggestions on how to get airlines to pay closer attention to pets. Jim Hutchins of Ogden, Utah, who keeps an online diary about his dog, Roxy, including her travels, recommended writing a friendly note on the carrier when checking a pet as luggage. This may help remind baggage handlers that your pet has a name and isn’t just another piece of cargo. Freezing a bowl of water can help reduce spills and keep the pet hydrated during a flight, he also noted. And booking a window seat may allow you to see your pet as it’s loaded into the aircraft.

Still, some owners go to extraordinary lengths to avoid the stress flying can cause to pets. Shirley Lin, from Arizona, wrote about driving to New York from the Southwest for four days and staying in pet-friendly hotels instead of checking her pets as luggage for a move in 2006. “As much as I would love to vaca (sometimes) with my dogs, it’s more stressful on them, and they’re perfectly happy at home with their favorite sitter,” she wrote.

But sometimes driving is just not an option, as when moving overseas. In those cases, airlines have been known to charge very high fees. One reader, who went by the screen name Krauset, griped about paying $1,700 to move the family dog, Jack, one way from Phoenix, Ariz., to England, on British Airways. “This was not much less than the total cost of our family’s four round-trip tickets,” Krauset wrote. “Shame on you British Airways. The least you could have done was put Champagne in Jack’s water bowl. Stop the price gouging!”

To avoid such charges, one reader, Ami from Washington, suggested smuggling a pet onboard: “I fly with my 20 lb. mutt often on US Airways, Jet Blue, Delta, Continental, etc. He is transported in a rolling bag that I carry on like a suitcase. I sneak him around as much as possible to avoid paying the pet charge. About 80% of the time he does not get spotted by ticketing agents or flight attendants. I only pay the fee when they catch me and make me pay it.”

Still others had more of an issue with pet owners than the pets themselves. “In our family we all have severe cat and dog allergies,” wrote a reader identified as rnzucker from Portland, Ore. “We were quite surprised one time when my daughter was sitting next to a woman who had a dog, who had no sympathy for my daughter and refused to move seats.

“My daughter ended up sitting totally separate from the family as a result,” rnzucker continued. “Pets in the cabin on planes (or on trains) can be a major health issue for many of us, even in carriers, and should not be ignored. Not everyone wants to be next to your pet.”

Will pet lovers and pet haters ever get along? One reader identified as markjay1 from New York City suggested fining dog owners if their pets misbehave onboard: “Every bark, yelp, growl or whine costs the owner $25, no limit. That’s for each one. A growl that ends with a bark is considered two infractions. Every ‘accident’ costs the owner $200. Every passenger whose allergies are set off by the dog is immediately paid $100 by the dog owner. If the dog gets out of its carrier the fine is $250. If the owner lets the dog out of its carrier the fine is $1,000. I think these rules are fair. If your dog is well controlled I have no problem with it, and you, on the plane.”
