AFTER carefully planning the family vacation and spending extra money on activities to keep the kids entertained, the last thing a parent wants to hear one of them say is “I’m bored” — in that familiar, oh-so-jaded tone.

For years, resorts have offered elaborate clubs catering to the 12-and-younger set, with activities like arts and crafts and water sports. But there was little in the way of entertainment for that most difficult of childhood stages: the teenage years.

“The teenager, unfortunately, was a forgotten age,” said Brad Cance, general manager at the Ritz-Carlton, Palm Beach, which opened a center for teenagers in December with a production studio for participants to play radio hosts, including a D.J. booth, and a fashion-model-style photography set. “We always had a fantastic kids’ program for the 5- to 12-year-olds,” he said. “We really hadn’t been doing the job we needed to do for teens.”

Recognizing that the fickle moods of a teenager can make or break a family vacation, a growing number of resorts are spending hundreds of thousands of dollars creating elaborate hangouts to keep the adolescent set content.

The Phoenician in Scottsdale, Ariz., recently spent $500,000 to convert a tennis lounge into an activity center, outfitted with an extra-large TV screen for interactive video games and a mini-movie theater. Club Med has been rolling out Passworld chainwide, with activities ranging from jewelry-making classes to graffiti workshops. In November, Club Med in Punta Cana in the Dominican Republic opened a renovated $200,000 teenagers’ center that includes a redesigned skateboarding park. The all-inclusive Occidental Grand Xcaret, in Mexico, south of Cancún, offers a Fun Club, with activities like volleyball, tennis, diving and video games, including Wii, on a 110-inch TV. By night, teenagers can enjoy movies and nightly parties at a disco.

Though they may vary in design and concept, these hangouts all strive to appeal to adolescents’ sensibilities, including their need to be independent and — most important — cool. Loews Coronado Bay Resort and Spa in Coronado, Calif., partnered with Pottery Barn’s PBteen to outfit its lounge with an “iChair,” with speakers and a subwoofer under the seat, that kids can plug their iPod or MP3 player into and rock out.

Rather than lump teenagers (14 to 17) together with their younger, tween siblings (11 to 13), Club Med largely keeps the groups separate for sporting activities, performances and meals.

Coast, the center for teenagers at the Ritz-Carlton, Palm Beach, has a no-parents-allowed policy (except to drop off or pick up their children and pay the $45-a-day rate) and says the space is “subtly supervised” by staff members who are youthful enough to be accepted by their teenage charges. By offering unstructured activities rather than highly programmed schedules, the space allows teenagers to socialize and assert their freedom, while satisfying parents by keeping their children in a contained, supervised setting.

Nancy Smith, from Miami, who procures furniture for hotels, helped furnish the teenagers’ center at the Ritz-Carlton, Palm Beach. She signed her 14-year-old son, Zach, and his friend Haley up for a day while at the hotel for business last month. The concept, she said, solved a problem she’s been dealing with lately when traveling with her teenager and her 11-year old daughter, Madeleine. While hotels typically offered a program for the 11-year-old, she said, there was little to keep Zach occupied. “The younger one was fine, but Zach was bored,” she said.

At Coast, Zach manned the D.J. booth, spinning his own beats while Haley hit the beauty station, where make-up, nail polish and other accessories were available to experiment with. “Everything was incredible,” Zach said. “They had D.J.-ing and a pool table and computers and all the best video game consoles. I could spend the whole day there.”

Such centers are turning out to be a draw even for school trips. After raising more than $2,000 for a field trip, the sixth-, seventh- and eighth-grade classes of the Montessori School of Ojai, Calif., chose to stay at the Loews Coronado for two nights earlier this month instead of going camping, in part because of all the amenities for teenagers. After a full day of swimming in the pool, hanging out in the special lounge, blasting music, playing video games and watching movies late into the night, the group, which ranged in age from 12 to 14, still wasn’t quite satisfied.

“They told us to go to bed,” said Kylie Overmeier, 12, “and I said I want to just live it up.”

Not surprisingly, the new centers report that among the most popular activities are video games. The Ritz-Carlton, Palm Beach, said, next to its D.J. booth, Guitar Hero is a close second in demand. Loews Coronado began offering weekly Wii video game challenges last summer, where teenagers could compete against one another in virtual games of tennis, golf and bowling. The sessions proved so popular the hotel plans to offer them daily this summer.

Resorts acknowledge the incongruity in teenagers playing video games their entire vacation, but say many parents still feel it’s better than having them holed up in their room watching TV or moping around the pool.

Le Parker Meridien in New York recently began projecting Wii games on a 20-foot wall in its racquetball court with surround sound; it rents the system for about $50 an hour for up to four people. In fact, the setup provides something parents can do with their teenagers. “It’s bringing families together because parents can get into it,” said Steven Pipes, managing director. “You work up a sweat doing it.”

Any activity parents can enjoy with their teenagers tends to be a draw. Michelle Bisnoff, a mother of two from Orange County, Calif., likes the Atlantis Resort in the Bahamas and the Grand Wailea in Maui because both places, though they “cost a bloody fortune,” have activities the entire family can enjoy — including her teenage daughter.

In addition to swimming with dolphins or sea turtle feeding excursions, Ms. Bisnoff recommends the concierge-level tower at Atlantis, “because you can drop in for a quick breakfast, snack or drink during the day and skip the crowded restaurants.” At the Grand Wailea, she said, it’s worth it to book the older rooms in the Wailea Wing for easy access to the children’s activity area.

Her teenage daughter declined to be interviewed for the story, texting her mother: “I will die of embarrassment if you quote us.”
