LOOKING for a bargain vacation to tide you over until the holidays? Better act fast.

While the travel industry is still hurting from the fallout, airlines, rental car companies and hotels have all been tweaking their businesses to ride out the downturn and push rates back up. And some of the efforts are working. Bookings have begun to pick up in cities like New York and Chicago as business travel has begun to stir. That’s putting a damper on the deals that travelers have grown to expect. Meanwhile, the high season is approaching for cold-weather getaways like Hawaii and the Caribbean, which are hoping to make up for the revenue lost in the off-season months.

“Demand seems to be bottoming out a bit,” in certain cities said Clem Bason, president of Hotwire.com, a discount travel site that helps travel companies fill airline seats, hotel rooms and rental cars that would otherwise go unsold. Even Las Vegas, the travel poster child of the recession with rooms sitting empty in the desert, recently dropped off Hotwire’s top-10 list of North American cities with the deepest hotel price cuts, after lingering in the top five for nearly a year. (In the top five now are Minneapolis; Jacksonville, Fla.; Vancouver, British Columbia; Orlando, Fla.; and Portland, Ore. But there are still plenty of deals out there, and prices are still lower overall. In fact, Expedia recently reported that air and hotel package prices for major destinations this fall have declined 29 percent compared with last season. And even with the latest round of capacity cuts, airlines continue to roll out aggressive sales. The average flier this fall is going to save about 10 percent compared with last year, said Joe Grus, the so-called fareologist at Bing Travel, the new Microsoft search engine that predicts airfare prices. Here is a roundup of some of the best bets for a cheap getaway.

Mexico

If you want sunshine and a beach, there’s no better value now than Mexico. And with Mexico’s winter high season on the horizon, the savings seem even more worthwhile.

Average airfare to Mexico from the United States this fall is about $392 round trip, according to Travelocity, down 25 percent from last fall. To win back visitors scared off by reports of Mexican gang and drug violence and the H1N1 outbreak earlier this year, resorts are slashing rates to the bone, with special incentives the longer guests stay.

Condo Hotels Playa del Carmen, a group of condominiums near the beach, is offering 25 percent off in November with one-bedroom studios starting at $100 a night. Guests who stay seven nights receive an additional 10 percent off.

Chain hotels, with lots of rooms to sell, are offering some of the most aggressive deals. Grupo Posadas, which owns the Fiesta and Aqua chains in Mexico, is offering up to 35 percent off nightly rates, plus 25 percent off dining and drinks. Discounted rates start at $71 a night through Dec. 23 at Fiesta Americana Cozumel Dive Resort. Marriott is offering 25 percent off rooms, as well as off food and beverages through Nov. 30 (use promotional code EMK).

Some of the best savings are at the most glamorous resorts. Guests who stay four nights or more at the Four Seasons Punta Mita, near Puerto Vallarta, receive a $1,234 credit applied at checkout, through Nov. 18 and from Nov. 28 to Dec. 21. That brings a $2,180 four-night vacation, based on the starting rate of $545 a night, to just $946. Velas Resorts, which runs three luxury all-inclusive properties in the Riviera Maya, Puerto Vallarta and Riviera Nayarit, has extended its Welcome Back promotion, which offers guests upgrades, through Dec. 24. Pay for a studio suite at the Velas Vallarta Suite Resort, for example, where rates start at $165 a person a night based on double occupancy, down from $420 normally, and receive an upgrade to a one- or two-bedroom suite.

Scottsdale, Ariz.

Once the province of snowbirds, golfers and Western fanatics, this desert resort town has evolved into a much hipper place with buzzing night life, luxury hotels and old storefronts converted into stylish restaurants, bars and boutiques. But despite all the hype, demand shrank in the recession, exposing just how overbuilt the region had become, with some of the newer hotels like the W Scottsdale and the Mondrian falling into financial straits. (There is a financial dispute between the developer and construction contractor at the W, while the Mondrian is negotiating with its lender over an unpaid $40 million mortgage that matured in June.) Both hotels say they remain open and fully operational.

Sprawling resorts, which were particularly hurt by the slowdown in conferences and meetings, are offering some of the deepest discounts. The Boulders Resort & Golden Door Spa, with 60 villas and 160 casitas nestled into the Sonoran Desert, has rooms from $149 a night — more than half off high-season rates. Just outside the city limits, the 119-room Royal Palms Resort and Spa has rates from $189 a night, down from $250. And in downtown, the midcentury modern Hotel Valley Ho is offering a fourth night free through Dec. 31.

Florida

Florida’s heavy reliance on tourism, combined with a glut of hotel rooms added before the downturn, made it among the most susceptible places to the recession. The number of visitors to the state dropped 9.4 percent between April and June this year compared with the same period last year, according to Visit Florida, the tourism marketing corporation for the state.

To lure visitors back, beach resorts and amusements parks are offering all kinds of savings. The Orlando/Orange County Convention & Visitors Bureau has a Free-for-Fall promotion, which includes free admission to tourist attractions and extra hotel nights free through Dec. 15. But act fast if you see something you like. Deals of the Week, like a third night free at the Lake Buena Vista Resort Village & Spa (listed at VisitOrlando.com/FallDeals), are replaced regularly.

Meanwhile, Walt Disney World is offering free dining with a five-night package from now through Nov. 24 and Nov. 29 to Dec. 17. With this deal, a family of four can stay at a Disney-value resort like the Pop Century for $1,377 including two meals and two snacks per person per night — a saving of $494.

Looking for something at the beach? Naples Grande Beach Resort is offering rooms from $149 a night through Dec. 22, including valet parking, daily buffet breakfast for two and a free stay for children 17 and under. The Greater Fort Lauderdale Convention and Visitors Bureau is also running its annual Dine Out program, in which restaurants offer three-course fixed-price menus for $35 Sundays through Thursdays.

And the Ritz-Carlton resorts in South Beach, Fort Lauderdale and Key Biscayne have extended their Kid’s Meal Plan through March 30. For $30 to $37 a day, children 12 and under can have unlimited sodas and juice and carte blanche during breakfast and dinner. So you don’t have to cringe when Junior orders the sautéed grouper every night. 