 IKEA’S inexpensive, contemporary furniture has attracted frugal shoppers for years, but a different kind of bargain is luring deal hunters to the Swedish retailer as the economy struggles to recover. And this offer doesn’t even require you to use an Allen wrench.

FREE TIME James Rotino of Brooklyn looks on as his son, Vincent, 5, talks with Samantha Mitchell, left, an employee in the free supervised play space at Ikea in Red Hook, Brooklyn.

Over-stretched, money-conscious parents are using the store’s supervised play area as their personal baby-sitting service.

James Rotino, a single father, has become a regular at the store in Brooklyn. He takes his 5-year-old son, Vincent, to Ikea once a week after preschool, heading straight for the free Smaland play center, where children who meet the height requirement (roughly 36 inches to 50 inches, depending on the store) can romp around in a pit full of plastic balls, watch videos, read books, play with puppets — sold at Ikea of course — or work on craft projects under the supervision of Ikea employees for up to an hour and a half.

While Vincent plays at Smaland — commonly referred to as the ball room — Mr. Rotino reads the paper or takes a walk among the aisles, but he rarely buys any of Ikea’s home furnishings. “We get hot dogs or something and that’s it,” he said. The free baby-sitting, he added, “gives me a little bit of a break and it makes my kid happy.”

The idea behind Smaland, of course, is to distract the children for long enough to let parents shop, possibly spending more than they would if their children were jumping on the display beds or whining about being bored. But recently, stores say, more parents like Mr. Rotino have begun to frequent Ikea for the playtime itself, depositing their children at Smaland and plopping into a display couch for an hour of peace and quiet, and then leaving without ever buying a thing.

Ikea estimates that Smaland attendance has jumped roughly 20 percent so far this year in its stores in major American cities. The company has 37 stores in the United States and 297 worldwide.

“Lately, we’ve seen an increase in a lot of new parents,” said Yumiko Whitaker, public relations manager for Ikea’s Orange County stores in California, where some have been spotted dropping children off at Smaland and then heading to Ikea’s cafe with their laptops for its free wireless. “They’re getting out of the house and we’re providing an environment that gives them a break.” Moms or dads who time it right visit on days that Ikea is offering one of its free breakfast promotions and score bacon and eggs for the family, too.

“We certainly hope they’ll purchase some Ikea products,” said Mona Astra Liss, the director of public relations for Ikea in the United States. “But if they don’t, we still feel satisfied we introduced them to Ikea.”

This low-pressure retail strategy, combined with Ikea’s reputation for selling low-priced furniture, seems to be working. While many of the nation’s home furnishing retailers have been suffering from sales declines, and some, like Costco’s two Home stores, are closing, Ikea has managed to eke out some profits. Sales for the private Ikea Group, which is notoriously tight-lipped about financials, were up 5 percent in January, according to a February article in Retail Week, a trade publication in Britain. “At a time when families are cutting back on vacations and restaurant visits, an outing to Ikea suddenly sounds quite attractive — especially when you throw in free baby-sitting and cheap food,” said Natalie Berg, a senior retail analyst at Planet Retail, a London-based consulting group.

Kristy and Matt Hall of Jersey City make regular visits to the Ikea stores in Elizabeth and Paramus, N.J., with their 2-year-old son, Murphy. “It’s a very creative way to get a night out and see if you can capture a little social life,” said Ms. Hall, who writes a travel blog called Two and a Half Travelers, where she has recommended the store as a rest-stop for families on road trips. “We’ve been doing it since he was born.”

Because Murphy is too small for the ball room, the evening usually begins with a stroll through the aisles, using one of the strollers provided by Ikea, then a visit to the children’s section so Murphy can play with the toys, and eventually a stop at the cafe for Swedish meatballs or ice cream. For the adults, the goal is to get a table in the part of the cafe adjacent to a small play area where Murphy can entertain himself while they keep an eye on him and catch up on the day’s events.

Every so often, an announcement is made over the store’s speaker system. “They say so and so, come into the ball room to pick up your child,” Ms. Hall said. “You can only imagine what the parent is doing.” When that happens, she said, “My husband and I look at each other and say, ‘I can’t wait till he can go into the ball room!’ “

Ikea says parents are not allowed to leave the store after dropping off their children at Smaland. At the Ikea in Round Rock, Tex., parents receive a beeper and are paged when their child’s time in the play area is up. If they don’t respond to the page, an announcement is made over the public address system. “If it takes too long we call them on their cellphone,” said Danielle Komisar, who oversees Smaland at the Round Rock store. “Sometimes they’re simply stuck in the marketplace.”

The baby-sitting is so popular that parents sometimes have to wait for a slot in Smaland, where capacity ranges from 20 to 60 children, depending on the store. At the store in Round Rock, “People have been really patient,” Ms. Komisar said. “They stand in line and wait.” On so-called Seize the Day events, when Ikea offers free breakfast and other special promotions, “we might have 20 kids waiting,” she said.

The bustling Smaland at the Brooklyn Ikea store, which can hold up to 60 children and which has an employee-to-child ratio of roughly 1 to 12, gets its share of regulars as well as customers who try to bend the rules. Samantha Mitchell, an employee there, said no one had ever tried to bribe her to get special treatment, “but there are people who try to get us to take their pets in.” 