In a year when global harvests need to be excellent to ease the threat of pervasive food shortages, evidence is mounting that they will be average at best. Some farmers are starting to fear disaster.

American corn and soybean farmers are suffering from too much rain, while Australian wheat farmers have been plagued by drought.

"The planting has gotten off to a poor start," said Bill Nelson, a grains analyst for Wachovia. "The anxiety level is increasing."

Randy Kron, whose family has been farming in the southwestern corner of Indiana for 135 years, should have corn more than 12 inches, or 30 centimeters, tall by now. But all spring, it seemed like there was a faucet in the sky. The rain was regular, remorseless.

Some of Kron's fields are too soggy to plant. Some of the corn he managed to get in has drowned, requiring him to replant. The seeds that survived have produced plants that were barely two inches high.

At a moment when corn should be flourishing in the United States, 1 plant in 10 has not even emerged from the ground, the U.S. Agriculture Department said Monday. Because corn planted late is more sensitive to heat damage in high summer, every day of delay practically guarantees a lower yield at harvest.

"This is pushing my nerves to the limit," Kron said one recent morning, the sky as dark as the unplanted earth.

Last winter, as the scope of the global food crisis became clearer, commodity prices doubled or tripled, provoking grumbling in the United States, riots in two dozen countries and the specter of greatly increased malnutrition.

As the world clamors for more corn, wheat, soybeans and rice, farmers are trying to meet the challenge. Millions of acres are coming back into production in Europe. In Asia, planting two or three crops in a single year is becoming more common.

American farmers are planting 324 million acres, or 131 million hectares, this year, up 4 million acres from 2007. Too much of the best land is waterlogged, however. Indiana and Illinois have been hit the worst, and Iowa, Wisconsin and Minnesota were inundated with rains last weekend.

Bob Biehl, whose farm is near St. Louis, Missouri, has managed to plant only 140 of the 650 acres he wanted to devote to corn. Some farmers in his area "haven't even been able to take the tractor out of the shed," he said.

U.S. soybean plantings are running 16 percent behind last year. Rice is tardy in Arkansas, which produces nearly half the country's crop.

"We're certainly not going to have as good a crop as we had hoped," said Harvey Howington of the Arkansas Rice Growers Association. "I don't think this is good news for anybody."

Harvests ebb and flow, of course. But with supplies of most of the key commodities at their lowest levels in decades, there is little room for error this year. American farmers are among the world's top producers, supplying 60 percent of the corn that moves across international borders in a typical year, as well as a third of the soybeans, a quarter of the wheat and a tenth of the rice.

"If we have bad crops, it's going to be a wild ride," said Joseph Glauber, the chief economist of the USDA. "There's just no cushion."

As every farmer knows, trouble can come at any point before the harvest is complete. Danny and Karen Smith get up in the middle of the night at their wheat farm in Milton, Kansas, whenever they hear thunder.

In a few weeks, the wheat they planted last fall will be ripe. A bad storm or, worse, a tornado could destroy it. Last year, the Smiths lost nearly all their wheat to a late freeze compounded by too much rain.

This year, the weather has been perfect: cool and moist. "See how plump these berries are?" Smith said, standing in the middle of one of his golden fields. "This will feed a lot of people."

The world wheat harvest is forecast to rise more than 8 percent this year, thanks to better weather and more acreage under cultivation. But even this bright spot is tentative. Australia was expected to emerge from a two-year drought, but that prediction is looking somewhat doubtful.