Ettore and Larisa Costanzo are showing off their new house, which they love madly.

"Notice how we upgraded so there's tile on all the floors," Ettore Costanzo, a retiree from Brooklyn, said. He pointed to the Kashmir granite in the kitchen. "It's nice, no?"

Now if only they could get the keys and go inside, instead of peering in the windows like a couple of peeping toms.

The house, on which the couple made a down payment of $88,820, is empty. Their belongings are in storage. They live, unhappily, in a hotel.

"It's very upsetting, not to be allowed in our own house," Larisa Costanzo, a Russian immigrant, said. "Please take our money and let us move in."

Their builder is Levitt & Sons, which ran out of cash in October and declared bankruptcy in November. All work on this planned 460-home development for retirees, grandly named Seasons at Prince Creek West, has ceased. The Levitt employees were laid off, the subcontractors put down their tools, and the Costanzos found themselves in limbo.

The first big home builder to fail in the current slump, Levitt's collapse illustrates how the turmoil in real estate is spreading far beyond subprime borrowers who cannot pay their mortgages. Levitt had a fabled brand, decades of experience and enthusiastic customers with good credit, but that was not enough to save it.

Paul Singerman, Levitt's bankruptcy attorney, said that as the real estate market in Florida went into "an absolutely unprecedented and catastrophic downturn," the builder's customers across the Southeast became victims. "There is a bad story, an unfortunate story, about every customer that placed a deposit," Singerman said.

Seasons is less than a quarter finished. About 90 buyers have paid a total of $3.47 million in deposits for houses in varying stages of completion, ranging from all but done, like the Costanzos', to unadorned dirt.

Another 90 houses are occupied, but many of these residents are, if anything, even more unhappy than the depositors. Levitt sold them on a community where everything would be taken care of. Those assurances mean little now.

"I can't believe we're dealing with Levitt & Sons," said Nancy Harth, 59, who moved in last March. "It feels like a start-up company."

The initial popularity of Levitt's 18 retirement communities, at least four of which are in as much disarray as Seasons, is testament to a durable name.

Sixty years ago, Levitt began mass-producing homes on a patch of Long Island potato fields. It quickly built tens of thousands of houses in Long Island, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, creating the modern suburb in the process.

In recent years, the builder has been concentrating on projects for the children of the Levittown generation, the 78 million aging baby boomers. Its sales strategy leaned heavily on both the company's long operating history and its long-ago achievements.

The pitch worked, brilliantly.

Christine Roberts was born in Queens in 1966. Six months later, her parents moved to Levittown, and Roberts lived there for 38 years. "Buying at Seasons meant I was still going to be part of a Levitt community," she said. "We thought that was so cool."

Now the Robertses, like the Costanzos, are full of uncertainty. They sold their Long Island home a year ago in preparation for their move to Seasons, and bought $10,000 of new furniture. With their Seasons house unfinished, they have been living in a trailer they own in the Poconos. The furniture is in storage in South Carolina.

"We didn't think anything bad was going to happen," said Roberts, a former U.S. Postal Service worker. "We really and truly had the utmost faith."

Many of the Seasons buyers came from the New York area. South Carolina offered a milder climate, lower taxes, less congestion and more golf.

Nancy Darr, 61, has macular degeneration, an eye condition that prevents her from driving and makes her unable to distinguish between a flower and a weed. She wanted a house, but could not do the upkeep.

Seasons promised to take care of her concerns. The gated community would have 24-hour security. An activities director would arrange entertainment. Owners would not have to mow their lawns. Even their bushes were to be fed by a central irrigation system.