 As the National Transportation Safety Board prepares for hearings into the February airplane crash outside Buffalo that killed 50 people, the focus is on how the two pilots reacted to a safety system warning them that they were flying too low, and whether their commute to work, combined with their job schedules, might have left them too tired to think clearly.

Firefighters at work in Clarence Center, N.Y., after a plane crash in February killed a man on the ground and 49 people aboard.

The three days of hearings, to begin here on Tuesday, will address, among other issues, whether small planes are as safe as big ones. Regulations for large and small planes are almost identical, but since the last fatal crash involving a large jet, in November 2001, there have been four fatal crashes involving commuter planes.

In the crash near Buffalo, officials have raised another issue: the possibility of inattention in the cockpit. Federal Aviation Administration rules require that below 10,000 feet, crews maintain a “sterile cockpit,” without irrelevant conversation.

But according to one investigator familiar with the contents of the cockpit voice recorder from the plane, the pilots’ “heads weren’t in the game.” The investigator spoke on the condition of anonymity because the information from the voice recorder was supposed to be kept secret until its release at the hearing on Tuesday.

Continental Connection Flight 3407 crashed in Clarence Center, N.Y., about five miles northwest of its intended runway at Buffalo Niagara International Airport on Feb. 12. All 49 people on board were killed, along with a man in a house that the plane hit when it plunged to the ground

Early speculation about the cause of the crash focused on icing, but the board has said that analysis of the flight data recorder showed ice did not make much of difference in the aircraft’s performance.

Investigators said that the plane, a Bombardier Dash 8 Q400, may have crashed because of an inappropriate response by the pilots to an automatic safety system. The system sensed that the plane, as it prepared to land, might have been flying too slowly to stay in the air, given its angle to the oncoming wind; this put it at risk for an aerodynamic stall that would result in the wings losing lift.

The warning may have come at a moment the crew thought was unreasonably early in the prelanding process. But the system is programmed to sound early to give an extra margin of safety when the plane may be confronting a buildup of ice. The crew had turned on its ice protection system shortly after leaving Newark Liberty International Airport, and there was apparently little ice on the wings. In any case, when the warning system sounded its alarm, shaking the yoke, one of the crew members yanked on the column to pull the nose up. It pitched way up, and the plane stalled, lost lift and crashed.

One area the hearing will explore is whether the crew had adequate training in the stall protection system.

Ben Berman, a former member of the safety board and an expert on aviation safety and automation who was not involved in this investigation, said that pilots can get confused “whenever it’s not clear what an airplane is doing, and whenever you have not been thoroughly trained in what it can do.”

When a pilot misunderstands what an automatic system is doing, he said, the pilot can make matters worse by reacting inappropriately.

The safety board has long been interested in how many hours pilots may safely be on duty. In this crash, investigators are also questioning the length of time it takes for pilots to get to work, and how that relates to their alertness in the cockpit. Airline pilots commonly work long hours for a few days and then have a long period off, so they only commute to work a few times a month. And they can generally fly free on other airlines, either in the passenger cabin, if there is an unsold seat, or sometimes in an extra seat in the cockpit. As a result, many of them live far from where they are based.

A report to be issued on Tuesday will document the last 72 hours of the captain’s and first officer’s lives before the crash of Flight 3407.

The captain, Marvin Renslow, 47, lived in Lutz, Fla. The first officer, Rebecca Shaw, 24, lived in Maple Valley, Wash., and had returned to Newark, where the crew was based, on a red-eye flight, according to investigators.

And sitting in the passenger section of the plane that crashed was another Continental Connection pilot, Joseph Zuffoletto, who was commuting home to Jamestown, N.Y. The general safety of commuter aircraft like the Dash 8 has also been scrutinized. Steven Chealander, the board member assigned to the crash site, said that despite the recent accidents, small planes were as safe as bigger ones. The difference, he said, is that a small airplane performs the riskiest parts of flying, the approach and the landing, more often. A big plane, he said, may make a 16-hour flight, with one landing; in the same 16 hours, a commuter plane may make seven landings.

Mr. Chealander, who left the board on Feb. 28 and now works for Airbus, said, “In no way would I want anybody to conclude it’s a risk to get on a commuter airplane.” 