Distracted drivers have become a hazard on roads. Has the problem spread to airliner cockpits?

It seems a reasonable question after two Northwest Airlines pilots flew 150 miles past their destination earlier this month.

Air traffic controllers tried to make radio contact for 91 minutes. The military put four fighter jets at the ready, fearing a hijacking. The White House situation room was alerted. A flight attendant finally roused the pilots’ attention by telephoning the locked cockpit to ask why they weren’t descending.

Were they asleep? No, just glued to their personal laptops — a violation of airline policy — to figure out together a complicated new pilot scheduling system while their Airbus A-320 flew on autopilot with 144 passengers on board. “The ultimate example of distracted driving,” one Washington lawmaker called it last week.

“What happened in the case of Northwest is one of the perils of cockpit automation,” said Najmedin Meshkati, a professor or industrial and systems engineering at the University of Southern California and aviation safety expert.

But Patrick Smith, an airline pilot, wrote in his “Ask the Pilot” column at Salon.com that the automation argument was “grossly oversimplifying things” and that “even the most routine and ‘automated’ flight remains subject to countless contingencies and a tremendous amount of input from the crew.” He called the Northwest Airlines episode a “freak event.”

Pilots are so busy when taking off and landing that the Federal Aviation Administration forbids nonflight-related conversation below 10,000 feet, under the “sterile cockpit rule.”

But once a jet reaches cruising altitude miles above the earth, computers manage the plane and there’s not much pilots have to do. They are supposed to listen to the radio, check in with air traffic controllers as they pass sector to sector, and make sure the autopilot is actually flying them from one point in midair to the next, in a sequence they usually specify before takeoff.

Some airlines have sought to counter the problems that can result from low workload by requiring pilots to make some kind of input every 15 minutes; if not, their cockpit computers will buzz or beep.

Chesley Sullenberger, the captain of the US Airways flight that landed in the Hudson River last January, told accident investigators in June that complacency can be a problem.

“I think one of the many challenges of our profession is that it’s become so ultrasafe, where it’s possible to go several calendar years without a single fatality, as we’ve just done recently, that it’s sometimes easy to forget what’s really at stake,” he said. “One of the challenges, I think, is to remain alert and vigilant and prepared.”

Distraction is always a potential danger, and not just because of personal computers and other gadgets. R. Key Dismukes, an aviation researcher at the NASA Ames Research Center, said concentrating on two tasks at once created a third task: balancing between the first two tasks. Pilots can strike that balance, but there is a risk of being completely diverted by one of the tasks. “Conversation can be particularly absorbing,” he said.

Northwest actually warned its pilots earlier this year not to become distracted by the changes that were in store after the carrier was acquired by Delta Airlines last fall. “Leave distractions about personal, corporate or other external issues outside of the flight deck,” the company directed in a memorandum.

Airline crews are more isolated than they used to be; the same doors that keep hijackers out have all but eliminated the interplay that was once routine between pilots and flight attendants. In the privacy of the cockpit, pilots can become casual. They even talk in whispers about actual napping; veterans say it is not unheard of for one to ask the other to mind the instruments during cruise, so he can close his eyes for a few moments. That is against the rules on American commercial jets but is allowed on military planes and by some foreign carriers.

Mark Rosenker, a former chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, said the Northwest case would give impetus to putting video cameras in cockpits. But that would not eliminate distraction, only document it. Voice recorders can do that.

F.A.A. officials were exploring banning laptops and other personal electronic devices in cockpits. But workplace banter in the cockpit (like complaining about management) can be distraction enough. “They all talk about the company, no matter what the company is,” Mr. Rosenker said.
