After radio contact was finally re-established with the Northwest Airlines plane that flew 150 miles past its destination last month, a controller twice asked the pilots why they had stopped answering radio calls, according to transcripts and audio files released Friday by the Federal Aviation Administration.

“Northwest 188, do you have time to give a brief explanation of what happened?” asked a controller at the Minneapolis Center, which was handling airspace over Eau Claire, Wis.

“Just cockpit distractions, that’s all I can say,” said a crew member, according to the transcript, which puts an asterisk next to “just,” indicating that transcription of the word is uncertain because of audio quality.

Six and a half minutes later, after giving the crew instructions on which landing pattern to use, the controller asked, “Is there any way you can elaborate on the distraction?”

“We’re just dealing with some company issues here, and that’s all I can tell you right now at this time,” the pilot responded, with the F.A.A. again indicating that some of the transcript is uncertain. Such uncertainties are common in air-to-ground transcripts.

The crew members — Capt. Timothy B. Cheney, 53, of Gig Harbor, Wash., and First Officer Richard I. Cole, 54, of Salem, Ore. — said later that they had been using their laptops to figure out how to use new software for submitting work schedule requests.

Northwest was acquired by Delta Air Lines last year, and employees have been transferring to various Delta procedures; Mr. Cole was trying to explain the program to Mr. Cheney, they said.

The transcript shows that the controller who initially made contact with the plane, after a 79-minute gap in communication, said, “I just have to verify that the cockpit is secure.”

“It is secure and we got distracted, we were, ah,” said the pilot, followed by some unintelligible words and apparently the phrase, “never heard a call and we just ... ”

Another recording, made by the cockpit voice recorder, is with the National Transportation Safety Board, which has not said if it will release a transcript. A board spokeswoman, Bridget Serchak, said Friday that the board intended to publish a docket in the case by the end of the year, which would be unusually swift. The docket could include a transcript or a summary of the transcript.

The board is investigating the event in a catch-all category of “other concerns.” That is because the incident, while troubling from a safety standpoint, resulted in no injuries or damage beyond burning some extra jet fuel. The North American Aerospace Defense Command monitored the situation but did not launch fighters.

The F.A.A. classified the incident as a “pilot deviation,” the same classification used when a pilot flies at the wrong altitude. But the agency still revoked the pilot licenses of Mr. Cheney and Mr. Cole. The two have appealed; their case will be heard by an administrative law judge of the safety board, probably within the next few months. The safety board functions as an appeals court for F.A.A. decisions.

It is not clear what information is on the cockpit voice recorder, since the model carried on that airplane, an Airbus A320, captures only the last 30 minutes of conversation, and that includes some time on the ground, before the engines are turned off.

The first two controllers to talk to the plane after the long gap both asked about fuel. “We’re good on fuel,” a crew member responded. The plane was carrying more than two hours’ worth of fuel, the crew said.

The flight, from San Diego to Minneapolis on Oct. 21, carried 144 passengers and 3 flight attendants. Despite numerous efforts from the ground, documented in the transcripts released Friday, it was a flight attendant who finally caught the pilots’ attention, by using the onboard phone system to ask when they would be descending.

The transcripts and audio files released Friday do not change the outline of what occurred, but do give some feeling for the mood of those involved. Controllers in Minneapolis asked other Northwest flights in the vicinity of Flight 188 to tune their radios to the Denver frequency, the last one that Flight 188 had used, to ask the pilots to report in. All of this is interspersed with routine communications with other airplanes. 