The Federal Aviation Administration on Tuesday revoked the licenses of two Northwest Airlines pilots who flew 150 miles beyond their destination last week when they were distracted by a cockpit discussion of airline policy.

The men have 10 days to appeal, the agency said.

The F.A.A. took unusually swift action against the two pilots, Capt. Timothy B. Cheney and First Officer Richard I. Cole.

In its emergency order revoking the licenses, the F.A.A. said the crew had been out of radio contact for 91 minutes and flown 150 miles past the intended destination. The agency cited “failing to comply with air traffic control instructions and clearances and operating carelessly and recklessly.”

The order said: “You operated Northwest 188 in a reckless manner that endangered the lives and property of others. You engaged in conduct that put your passengers and your crew in serious jeopardy. You have demonstrated your lack of regard for or inability to adhere to your responsibilities to exercise the highest standard of care, judgment, skill and responsibility.”

The Air Line Pilots Association provided lawyers for the two men, aviation officials said, but the union itself has declined to confirm that. The pilots did not immediately return telephone calls on Tuesday.

After their flight from San Diego to Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport last Wednesday, the two men told federal investigators in separate interviews that they had been discussing the new crew scheduling system being instituted at Northwest, which was acquired by Delta last fall.

Mr. Cole, 54, of Salem, Ore., who was hired in 1997 and had about 11,000 hours of experience, was using his personal laptop computer, a violation of airline policy, to teach Mr. Cheney, 53, of Gig Harbor, Wash., who was hired by Northwest in 1985 and had 20,000 hours of experience, how to use the new software, the two men said.

They said they heard voices on their cockpit radio but ignored them.

Delta, in a statement Monday, said the lapse could cost both men their jobs. They remained suspended pending the completion of the airline’s investigation.

The airplane, an Airbus A-320, apparently flew on autopilot to the last point specified by the crew, a point in mid-air at which the crew would ordinarily receive instructions from air traffic controllers about which approach pattern to use. The autopilot then displayed a notice on the electronic cockpit displays that it had run out of instructions, and the plane continued on the same heading and the same altitude, 37,000 feet, awaiting further instructions.

Crew members told investigators that when a flight attendant, apparently surprised by the plane’s failure to begin its scheduled descent — contacted them on the plane’s internal telephone system, they saw the notice on their screens and realized they had flown past their destination.

The plane turned around and landed without incident in Minneapolis, but the police boarded to assure that it had not been hijacked.

The pilots passed breath analysis tests to check for alcohol use. They had had a 17-hour break between the San Diego-to-Minneapolis trip and their previous flight.