A few hours before she died, Rebecca L. Shaw, the co-pilot of a commuter plane that crashed near Buffalo in February, sent her husband a text message saying she felt “soooo good.”

But a little while later in the cockpit, she told the captain otherwise: that she would not have come to work if she had known how bad she would be feeling.

Her statements were included in documents released on Monday by the National Transportation Safety Board, which is investigating the crash on Feb. 12 of Continental Connection Flight 3407 from Newark, operated for Continental by Colgan Air.

The new information offers a glimpse into the lives of Ms. Shaw, 24, and the plane’s captain, Marvin Renslow, 47, who died along with the 47 others on board and a man on the ground, in his home in Clarence Center, N.Y.

Ms. Shaw spent the night of Feb. 11 traveling from Seattle to Newark on two different cargo flights, on jump seats in the cockpits.

“I feel soooo good, I took a nice six-hour nap on the comfy recliner!” she said in a text message to her husband, Troy, that she sent at 11:05 a.m. on Feb. 12. The recliner was apparently in the crew lounge at Colgan Air’s base at Newark Liberty International Airport, the starting point of the flight to Buffalo.

In a message she sent six hours earlier, she said, “So I made it to Newark just fine,” adding that because the weather had been bad, the flight she had originally been assigned to had been canceled.

Also in the documents released Monday was a description of the investigators’ interview with Ms. Shaw’s mother, Linda K. Morris. The Shaws were living with Ms. Morris in Seattle.

Ms. Morris said that her daughter liked commuting to work from a distance, because, as the investigators’ summary put it, “the distance allowed sleep opportunities during the flight.” Mrs. Morris said her daughter was not sick the day she left Seattle.

The board also released a transcript of 62 minutes of cockpit conversation before takeoff. (It had previously released a transcript of the conversation during flight.)

Before takeoff, Ms. Shaw, who could be heard clearing her throat and sneezing, told Captain Renslow, “O.K., I’m ready to be in the hotel room.”

He replied that he felt bad for her.

“Well,” Ms. Shaw said, “this is one of those times that if I felt like this when I was home, there’s no way I would have come all the way out here, but now that I’m out here —— .”

She added, “If I call in sick now I’ve got to put myself in a hotel until I feel better.” If that happened, she said, “at least I’m in a hotel room on the company’s buck. But we’ll see. I’m pretty tough.”

The transcripts indicate that Captain Renslow may also have been coughing and clearing his throat.

The crew’s fitness for duty is an issue because neither of the two seemed to notice that on approach, the speed of the plane, a two-engine turboprop, dropped too much. Captain Renslow was at the controls, and when an alarm indicated that the plane was about to fall because of its slow speed, he appears to have pulled back on the control yoke when he should have pushed it forward.

Also at issue in the crash is whether first officers are paid enough to afford accommodations for rest before flights.

Ms. Shaw told Captain Renslow that her husband, a soldier in the Army, was paid “more in one weekend of drill than I make in an entire pay cycle here,” or half a month.

She told the captain that her gross pay was $15,800 a year, but that she was expecting a raise soon, once she had been with the company for a full year. But, she said, the raise would not take effect until the first full pay period after her anniversary, costing her $200.

“Two hundred bucks to an F.O. is a lot of money,” she said.