President Obama’s nominee to head the Federal Aviation Administration said on Tuesday that while the safety rules governing commuter carriers are the same as those for major airlines, the level of safety provided may actually be different and requires another look.

“The reality is, when you’re hiring a pilot at a major carrier, you’re probably going to get somebody who walks through the door with 5,000 hours” of experience, the nominee, J. Randolph Babbitt, a former captain at Eastern Airlines, said at his confirmation hearing. “When you’re hiring a pilot at a regional, you’re going to get somebody with considerably less time,” he said.

He said that if confirmed, he would review training standards.

Aviation safety rules have been under scrutiny since the Feb. 12 crash of a twin-engine turboprop on a flight from Newark to Buffalo, killing 50. Pilot error is suspected.

The regional carriers once operated under rules that were less stringent than those for the major carriers in several ways; for example, two-engine commuter planes did not have to be able to perform as well on a single engine as big airliners did, important in case of engine failure, and pilots were allowed to work longer hours. In the mid-1990s, the regionals were brought under the same set of rules as the mainline carriers, said Mr. Babbitt, who at that time was president of the Air Line Pilots Association.

Mr. Babbitt appeared before the Senate Commerce Committee, where he was questioned by Byron L. Dorgan, a North Dakota Democrat who is planning a subcommittee hearing into the crash. Mr. Dorgan said he was “staggered” by details that emerged last week in a hearing by the National Transportation Safety Board. He said he suspected that while the rules were the same, they may be enforced differently.

He cited a salary for the co-pilot on the flight, which he put at $16,500 — a figure that was used at the safety board hearing but corrected a few hours later by the airline to $24,000. The co-pilot had flown across the continent on two late-night flights to arrive for work on the day of the crash. Mr. Babbitt did not comment on airline pay, and the F.A.A. does not regulate salaries.

Senator Dorgan also released a letter signed by committee leaders asking the inspector general of the Transportation Department to look into a variety of issues raised by the crash, including a relationship between safety and pilot pay. The implication is that pilots are apt to show up for work without having slept because they are paid too little to either live near where they are based or to get a hotel there on the night before.

In the hearing, Mr. Babbitt said that he would modernize the air traffic system to reduce delays. New techniques allow smoother descents to airports, reducing fuel consumption and noise, and potentially reducing congestion, he said. These should be put into effect first at congested airports, he said, but not initially in New York.

“This probably should open Off Broadway, if you would,” he said.

Mr. Babbitt did not face any opposition from the committee, although Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey asked if he would delay carrying out a reorganization of the airspace in the Northeast until air traffic controllers were included in the process. Mr. Babbitt said he would like to involve “all stakeholders.”