Flying fatigued and confronting an unfamiliar situation are ingredients for seizing on the wrong solution in an urgent situation and sticking with it, an aviation psychologist said Thursday at a National Transportation Safety Board hearing into the crash of a commuter plane near Buffalo that left 50 dead.

R. Key Dismukes, a researcher at NASA’s Ames Research Center, said that the challenge before the crew of Continental Connection flight 3407, a twin-engine turboprop flying from Newark, N.J., to Buffalo, was to monitor several different factors at once.

The pilot and copilot evidently missed one; the plane, which was collecting ice on its windshield and wings, was slowing to an unsafe speed. But when a warning system began vibrating the control column to get their attention, the captain pulled the nose up when he should have pushed it down. The plane plummeted to the ground and landed on a house, killing all 49 people on board and one man in the house.

But preparing pilots to do a number of things at one time is difficult. “We don’t really train pilots” for that, Dr. Dismukes said during the third and final day of hearings into the Feb. 12 crash. “We tell them they’re supposed to be vigilant, we tell them to monitor, but we haven’t developed explicit techniques.”

Juggling tasks is easier with practice, as anyone who has learned to drive a car can attest, he said, but confronting the vibrating column, called a stick shaker, was probably something new and startling.

The airline that was contracted with Continental Airlines to make the one-hour commuter flight, Colgan Air, said on Wednesday that it had given the crew simulated training in the activation of the stick shaker, but not in the next step, activation of the stick pusher, which takes control and pushes the nose of the plane down. In this instance, the stick pusher kicked in shortly after the captain pulled instead of pushed.

“I don’t see any evidence that he ever understood the situation he was in,” said Dr. Dismukes of the 47-year-old pilot, Capt. Marvin D. Renslow. “He knew something was wrong, but I don’t see that he ever said, ‘wait a minute, I’ve got to get the nose down.’ ”

Rather, he said, the tendency in such situations is for tunnel vision to set in, and for the pilot to stick with the chosen course, whether or not it is appropriate.

Investigators say the captain may have mistaken his situation, the impending stall of the wings, with a related problem, a stall of the tail. If the tail stalls, the solution is to pull the nose up, not push down. Distinguishing between the two is difficult, although better awareness of the overall situation of the airplane might have made the situation clearer to Captain Renslow or his first officer, Rebecca Shaw, 24.

In addition to trying to determine what went on in the cabin in the moments before the crash of the Bombardier Dash 8 Q400, investigators followed the standard procedure of trying to document the work and sleep schedules of the pilots. Ms. Shaw had spent the previous night taking two flights from her home near Seattle to Newark. Captain Renslow had also come to Newark the night before the flight from his home in Lutz, Fla., near Tampa, but investigators said they could not find evidence that he had stayed at a hotel or in an apartment and instead might have napped in a crew lounge at Newark Liberty International Airport.

Another issue is the whether non-pertinent conversation during the approach to Buffalo Niagara International Airport, something that violates F.A.A. rules, distracted the two pilots. A voice cockpit recorder showed that the two pilots discussed a range of subjects unrelated to the landing in the moments leading to the crash

While the safety board will not issue a final report on the crash for months, it might reiterate a recommendation it made after a crash in 2002 that took the life of Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, who was flying in a smaller twin-engine turboprop. In that instance, the board recommended that the Federal Aviation Administration consider requiring that planes give audible warning of deteriorating speed before the stick shaker goes off.

Some pilots oppose the notion of having more warning systems in the cockpit.