 If quarterback Eli Manning needed inspiration during the Giants' bye week, he received a double dose to go with some family football values to ease the pain of a four-game losing streak.

On Saturday, Manning and his father, Archie, were in Oxford, Miss., to see Ole Miss defeat Tennessee, 42-17.

Each is a former quarterback for Mississippi, which is 7-3.

On Sunday, Manning watched on television as his brother Peyton rallied Indianapolis to a come-from-behind 35-34 victory over the New England Patriots. The Colts improved to 9-0.

On Monday, Eli Manning and his teammates returned to the Meadowlands training center to start preparations to face Atlanta on Sunday afternoon at Giants Stadium.

The Giants and the Falcons are each 5-4. Even that mediocre mark seemed to improve for the Giants when Dallas and Philadelphia, their nearest rivals in the National Football Conference East, lost Sunday.

But even before those results, Manning said, he did not despair.

''We knew we weren't in an awful situation,'' he said in a conference call. ''It's not exactly where we wanted to be. Teams can turn things around. Teams can get hot.''

The Cowboys remain atop the N.F.C. East at 6-3. The Eagles and the Giants are tied for second. The Giants, who won at Dallas and lost at Philadelphia, will face them at home on consecutive weeks in December.

The chances of Manning and the Giants qualifying for the playoffs are respectable with seven games left. All they have to do is reverse their recent trajectory.

''Get a win,'' Manning said, ''and get back on a winning streak.''

After starting the season 5-0 against mostly weaker teams, the Giants slumped against better competition. Manning started to slump after an injury to his right foot in Week 4.

He was asked Monday if the rest had helped him heal. ''The foot feels fine; it's not an issue,'' Manning said. ''The injury is kind of over and done with.''

He said that a week without practice ''refreshes the whole body.'' Manning described Monday's one-hour workout as good. ''It wasn't hard to shake off the rust,'' he said. ''Guys were sharp.''

Running back Ahmad Bradshaw was the only Giant who did not practice. He has limited his workouts this season because of a broken toe on his right foot.

Despite the slump, the Giants' offense remains fifth in the N.F.L. with 377.7 yards per game. The New Orleans Saints lead the league at 426.1. The Giants' defense is ranked even better, allowing a league-low 274.4 yards per game. The worst of the 32 teams is Cleveland, at 409.1.

Although the defense has been inconsistent this season, it may soon be bolstered by the return of cornerback Aaron Ross, who has missed every game with hamstring injuries but is practicing. In their last game, a 21-20 loss to San Diego on Nov. 8, linebacker Michael Boley and lineman Chris Canty returned from injury.

Defensive end Justin Tuck, who has been playing in a harness because of a shoulder injury, said Monday that he hoped to play without it at some point.

''That's the plan,'' Tuck said. ''When will that happen? I don't know. Will it happen? I don't know. I would love to get to that point.''

The Giants will play two games in five days, the second on Thanksgiving night at Denver. But they may be facing the Falcons and the Broncos at the right time. Atlanta has lost three of its last four games and Denver (6-3) has lost three straight.

''Sometimes, you don't feel tired until you get away and realize that your body is tired, your mind is tired,'' Manning said of the bye week. ''So I think it was good for us.'' 