Last season, the consistent strength of the Giants’ offense was a combination of three running backs known as Earth, Wind and Fire.

It was meant as a compliment, but those elements of nature can also spell disaster, and this season’s fortunes have bordered on that.

On Tuesday Ahmad Bradshaw (Fire) was on crutches with at least a sprained left ankle, according to the Giants. The foot was in a protective boot and it was uncertain if he could play on Thursday night at Denver, or if he would even make the trip.

“We’ll see,” Coach Tom Coughlin said. Coughlin said Bradshaw left Sunday’s 34-31 victory over Atlanta with what the Giants thought was a routine sprain.

“But, evidently, it is more severe than that,” Coughlin said. For most of the season, Bradshaw has played with a fractured bone in the small toe of his right foot and has practiced rarely.

Bradshaw was unavailable for comment.

Should Bradshaw be unable to play, his replacement would probably be Gartrell Johnson, a rookie who has carried 11 times for 39 yards.

Brandon Jacobs (Earth) also left Sunday’s game with an injury to his right leg.

“I feel really good,” Jacobs said Tuesday. “It’s all mental. I took a hit near the leg. It could have been worse. I could have gone back in the game.”

Derrick Ward (Wind) left as a free agent for Tampa Bay.

Danny Ware, the third-string running back, severely injured his right elbow on the season’s opening kickoff. Since returning, he has carried 4 times for 24 yards. Jacobs leads the Giants with 163 carries for 656 yards. Bradshaw is second with 115 for 549.

The passing game of Eli Manning paced the Giants’ offense against Atlanta, but the defense again was subpar. The Giants gave up two touchdowns in the last 6 minutes 1 second, allowing Atlanta to force overtime.

In the previous game, a 21-20 loss to San Diego before the bye week, the Giants gave up a late touchdown and lost.

Although the Giants are still second in the N.F.L. in overall defense, allowing an average of 282.2 yards a game, they are last in efficiency against touchdowns inside the 20-yard line.

That means they have given up touchdowns 74.3 percent of the time that opposing teams have the ball in the red zone.

Those failures, particularly late in games, have bothered defenders like cornerback Terrell Thomas because much of the damage has been through passing.

“It hurts my heart, obviously,” Thomas said. “It leaves a bitter taste.”

Chase Blackburn, who filled in at middle linebacker Sunday for the injured Antonio Pierce, said the victory over the Falcons “almost feels like we lost.”

Blackburn said the faster tempo of the Atlanta offense created communication problems among his teammates, and that the defense was not always fully prepared for the snap of the ball.

“For whatever reason, we didn’t seem to get the checks done right there at the end,” Blackburn said. Pierce said similar things before he was sidelined with a neck injury.

Another perception is that the Giants’ pass rush, a strength in the Super Bowl championship after the 2007 season, has not consistently pressured quarterbacks.

Defensive end Justin Tuck rejected that idea Tuesday. “We haven’t got the sacks, but I’d dare to say we might lead the league in quarterback presses and quarterback hits,” he said.

But Tuck has been hobbled by shoulder and leg injuries. Late in games, at about the time the entire defense sags, Tuck has gotten up slowly after plays, sometimes with the assistance of trainers.

Referring not only to himself but to the sagging of the entire defense, Tuck said, “Fatigue might have something to do with it, but I don’t think that’s the all telltale.”

Behind him, the secondary has been bolstered by the return of Aaron Ross, who played his first game Sunday after missing the previous nine with a hamstring injury.

Instead of playing his usual cornerback position, Ross helped out at safety in packages of five and six defensive backs. Corey Webster remained at the other corner opposite Thomas.

“We still have room for improvement,” Webster said. “You never want to give up 30-some points. It was a pretty ugly win. Hopefully, we can move forward and build off it.”

Coughlin, when asked to diagnosis why the defense has not been able to stop late passing drives, said, “I wish I had an answer.”
