 For Giants quarterback Eli Manning, the injury news was not as bad as it could have been. But for linebacker Antonio Pierce, the development was worse.

Manning said Monday that continuing discomfort in his right foot would not prevent him from practicing regularly or playing Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys.

But Pierce will miss the rest of the season, the Giants announced, because the bulging disk in his neck has not improved enough to get him back for the last five games of the regular season. The Giants have put Pierce on the injured reserve list.

In a statement released by the Giants, Pierce said the doctors told him ''the risk of playing is too great, regardless of how I feel physically.''

He added,'' That is the most disappointing part of this, because I feel great and have no pain.''

Manning and Pierce are mirror images, in that Manning calls the signals for the offense, and Pierce calls the signals for the defense.

Although Manning has played in every game this season, Pierce has missed the last two with his neck injury. Pierce visited a specialist last week in Los Angeles to get a second opinion. But the doctor there told him the same thing as he heard from team doctors, that he was not yet fit to play.

''You do notice his presence in the huddle,'' defensive end Justin Tuck said before Pierce's status was announced. ''A.P. has a lot of intangibles that made him a great linebacker and a great leader on this defense. Is he missed? Absolutely. But can we use that as an excuse? No.''

Manning missed part of a game on Oct. 4 at Kansas City with pain from an ongoing plantar fasciitis condition in his right heel. Since then, he has played in every game, but recently developed a stress reaction in another part of the foot.

''It's been the same for the past three or four weeks,'' Manning said of his foot discomfort in a conference call with reporters. ''Nothing new. I can go out there and do everything I need to do.''

Manning said his biggest problem from the foot was the time it took for almost daily treatments in the training room, some of them lasting an hour or more. 