It is not a good sign for a football team when its kickoff returner has so many chances to look good, the way Domenik Hixon did Sunday for the Giants. That means the opposing team is scoring a lot, as the New Orleans Saints did with seven touchdowns at the Superdome.

It is also not positive when the quarterback follows an interception by arguing with his running back about blocking. That was the case with Eli Manning and Ahmad Bradshaw during the Saints’ 48-27 victory.

The stunning result raised New Orleans’s record to 5-0 and dropped the Giants to 5-1.

The Giants came into the game with the league’s top-ranked defense but knew they were overdue to be tested by a top quarterback on a good team. Their last three games had been against Tampa Bay, Kansas City and Oakland, teams that have a combined record of 3-15.

But few people would have predicted that Drew Brees would throw four touchdown passes and fire repeated darts through the big gaps between the Giants’ linebackers and defensive backs. He completed 23 of 30 passes for 369 yards. It would have been worse if he had not left the game early.

“I don’t know if we ever hit him,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said. “A bunch of couldn’t-happens did happen. There’s a lot of things that need to be addressed.”

Manning, returning to his hometown, completed only 14 of 31 passes, one for a touchdown, and threw one interception and lost a fumble when he was sacked.

After the interception, which came with the Giants trailing, 34-17, in the third quarter, Manning and Bradshaw appeared to exchange angry words and gestures. After the game, Manning said the play was a blitz that did not get picked up.

“Got to be smarter than that,” Manning said. When asked to share what he said to Bradshaw, Manning said, “Nah.”

One bright spot was Hixon, who ran back seven kickoffs for 230 yards and two punts for 51 yards. But the Giants lost right tackle Kareem McKenzie with a groin-muscle injury and wide receiver Mario Manningham with a rib injury that was X-rayed after the game.

New Orleans was coming off its bye week and had extra time to plan for the Giants. But that will not matter to offensive coordinators for the next 10 regular-season games who will study this game’s films to exploit the vulnerabilities of the Giants’ linebackers and defensive backs.

Middle linebacker Antonio Pierce, said, “I didn’t see this coming.” He said play-action fakes by the Saints caused part of the problem but, like Coughlin and others, Pierce said the Giants did not make plays even when in position to do so.

One of the victims was safety C. C. Brown, who said, “We didn’t compete hard enough trying to go up for the ball.”

In addition, before a roaring crowd of 70,011, the Giants seemed to lose their poise. They took unforced penalties, one for too many men in the huddle.

Two displays involving running back Brandon Jacobs that were not penalized were nevertheless revealing.

Jacobs, who has been struggling this season, was chased out of bounds on one play in the first half and began to shout forcefully at the cheerleaders who represent the Saints.

In the second half, Jacobs challenged Saints defensive tackle Remi Ayodele to a fight. Jacobs, who loves boxing, stood in front of him, hands cocked in a fighter’s pose.

“He stuck his hand up in my face,” Jacobs said of Ayodele. “Karma comes back around.”

Had this been a boxing match, the Giants might not have been knocked out. They kept getting off the floor and off the ropes and punching back. But the judges would have ruled the outcome a unanimous decision for the Saints, or someone in the corner might have thrown in the towel.

Of the game in general, Jacobs, who finished with seven carries for 33 yards, said, “They wanted it more than we did.”

The Giants’ defense played without four injured players: safety Kenny Phillips, who is out for the season; Aaron Ross, who has yet to play; linebacker Michael Boley, who is out for about a month; and lineman Chris Canty, whose return is uncertain.

The remaining players, particularly behind the defensive line, seemed a step slower than the seven Saints pass-catchers, led by Marques Colston, who had eight receptions for 166 yards, one of them a touchdown. Brees was never sacked and rarely touched, in part because he threw so quickly.

Danny Clark, the strongside linebacker, said Brees was “one of the best in the business” and “played as well as he can.”

Clark added: “We have no excuses. We go home and lick our wounds.”

Clark was beaten by the former Giants tight end Jeremy Shockey for a touchdown that gave New Orleans a 14-0 lead late in the first quarter. “I kick myself,” Clark said. “I was a step behind.”

Shockey said that beating his former team was “something special” and that an official told him to tone down his taunting.

“You can’t have fun anymore, I guess,” Shockey said. “I’m sure we will face these guys again somewhere down the road.”

If that happens this season, it will be only in the playoffs. That would be fine with Pierce. “I hope so,” he said.