Cornerback Aaron Ross hopes to make his season debut Sunday when the Giants host Atlanta in their 10th game of the season.

Giants cornerback Aaron Ross has been troubled by an injured hamstring.

Giants cornerback Aaron Ross and the Olympic sprinter Sanya Richards plan to marry in February.

But his fiancée will not be at Giants Stadium to see him and will not even watch the game on television.

“I’m so sad,” Sanya Richards said by cellphone from a car that took her to Kennedy Airport late last week. “We’re going to tape it at home, so I can watch it as soon as I return on Monday.”

Richards, who will marry Ross in February, helped Ross through his hamstring injury this season and, before that, with a bout of the blues that left him discouraged about football.

But Richards has something bigger on her schedule Sunday. In a worldwide context, she is the more famous athlete in their home and she will be in Monte Carlo for the World Athletics Gala. Richards, a two-time gold medalist in the Olympic Games in the 4x400-meter relay and the current world champion at 400 meters, is one of five finalists for female athlete of the year, which will be announced at the event by the International Association of Athletics Federations.

She has already won the award once, in 2006. Ross said he understood her priority. “I’m happy, she’s doing her thing,” Ross said with a smile. “It’s all good at the house.”

Ross’s troublesome hamstring has been one of the significant subplots this season for the Giants (5-4), who will be trying to end a four-game losing streak against the Falcons (5-4).

His injury and the season-ending knee surgery to safety Kenny Phillips disrupted the Giants’ secondary and made it vulnerable to the N.F.L.’s better-passing quarterbacks.

Ross practiced at cornerback and safety last week, and he said he could fill in at safety. “I don’t know if I’m going to or not, but I can,” he said. “It wouldn’t be a big challenge.”

Ross, a first-round draft choice in 2007, is listed at 6 feet and 197 pounds. He has the lean physique of a gymnast or a dancer. He wears diamonds in his ear lobes and whiskers on his chin.

Around the locker room all week, Ross was ebullient, smiling and talkative. On the practice field, between drills, he bounced on his toes, jogged in place and wiggled as if dancing.

“He’s been the same way at home,” Richards said. “He is trying to stay mobile and keep his hamstring warm. But I think, more so, it’s just excitement. He’s really gone through a tough time.”

After Ross had a relapse of his injury early in the season, Richards arranged the visit of a personal trainer she referred to only as Adrik from Switzerland.

The trainer advocated stretch bands and medicine balls. “He was here two or three weeks to try to help Ross out of it,” Richards said. “Ross definitely saw some improvement.”

Richards said she had referred to her fiancé by his last name since they met as students at the University of Texas. “I call him other names at home,” she said. “But, in public, it’s Ross.”

A different sort of ailment plagued Ross during the 2008 season. As a rookie in 2007, Ross helped the Giants win the Super Bowl.

But the 20-game season left a toll when the next training camp came around. “I just wasn’t happy,” Ross said. “I knew the whole year there was something going on, but I really didn’t have a clue.”

Richards said it was mental fatigue. “I definitely noticed it,” she said. “He was kind of losing interest, just having a hard time.”

She said Ross “was almost like he kind of wished he had a year off to just get over everything, mentally.”

“I thought he was a bit withdrawn,” she said.

Richards said she had battled through similar emotional letdowns after the Olympics. “Ross and I talked all the time,” she said. “I knew what he was going through.”

She told him to try to think back to when he was a child and played football for the love of the competition “and not the pressure and the finances and all the different stuff that kind of distracts you.”

Richards said Ross “didn’t have to see a sports psychologist or anything” to get out of his emotional trough, and unfortunately his body broke down when his spirits repaired.

“I’ve tried to be a good resource and help him in whatever way I can to recover,” Richards said. That includes meal planning. She said that she was the better cook.

“We don’t eat red meat,” she said. “We have grilled chicken or fish for lunch and dinner with vegetables, potatoes or broccoli. In the morning, we have egg whites, but Ross usually leaves early for practice.”

While there, the coaches have been cagey about how they plan to use him. Tom Coughlin said Friday that “you never know” whether Ross would start or if he would play safety or corner.

Bill Sheridan, the defensive coordinator, said that Ross “will be ready to play either or” and that “he could play both,” and that “it is refreshing for him to be out there.”

“He is very enthused,” Sheridan said.

His teammates sound that way, too. Cornerback Terrell Thomas, who might lose some playing time to Ross or have his role adjusted, said Ross “gives us a lot more depth.”

“We’re a little more versatile,” Thomas said.

Justin Tuck, a defensive end, said Ross is young but “he’s played a lot of games.”

“We consider him a veteran,” Tuck said. “He brings speed and experience.”

Osi Umenyiora, another defensive end, laughed about Ross’s recent displays of nervous energy. “He’d better have some pep in his step,” after the long layoff, Umenyiora said.

Ross said several times in recent days that coaches had resisted his nagging to play more snaps in practice. He said he realized that “hamstrings are just one step away from being reinjured.”

So the coaches, Ross said, were just being cautious. Of his energy and enthusiasm, Ross said, “I have about three months saved up in me.”
