 Giants tight end Kevin Boss chuckled softly as he discussed a photograph recently sent to him. It showed Boss after he caught a pass against Arizona at Giants Stadium on Oct. 25.

Discuss the Giants, Jets, fantasy and everything else N.F.L on the Times’s pro football blog.

“A pretty funny expression on my face,” Boss said. “I wouldn’t even call it an expression. My eyes were just closed.”

They were shut because a helmet-to-helmet hit by Cardinals safety Antrel Rolle caused Boss to black out momentarily as he crashed to the ground while holding on to a 25-yard pass.

Afterward, Boss emerged from the X-ray room to say: “It feels like I’ve gotten in a car wreck. Any time you get hit that hard, definitely the lights turn off for a second. But I came to pretty quick.”

Boss has not missed a game since the hit, and his value to the team has increased. He caught two touchdown passes last Sunday in a 34-31 victory against Atlanta, raising his season total to four.

He is tied for second on the team in touchdown receptions with Mario Manningham and Hakeem Nicks. Steve Smith leads with five.

At 6 feet 6 inches, Boss is the Giants’ tallest target and is emerging as a solution to their scoring problems inside the opposition’s 20-yard line, where room to maneuver is limited and the ability to elevate becomes more important.

But by catching difficult passes in confined quarters, Boss has also become a target. Against San Diego on Nov. 8, he took another hit to the head, this one from Eric Weddle.

Against Philadelphia on Nov. 1, Boss left the game briefly after he was bent backward. He missed a game against Oakland on Oct. 11 with a sprained ankle.

Quarterback Eli Manning recently called Boss “tough as nails,” but that was a mixed compliment. Nails get hammered, and Boss has taken a pounding in his third professional season.

“It’s been a long year,” Boss said. “I’ve taken a few shots.” Although the recent bye week had helped him heal, he said, two games in five days this week will “take its toll.”

That showed Thursday night in the Giants’ 26-6 loss to the Denver Broncos, as Boss had just two receptions for 22 yards.

Of the blows to the head against Boss earlier this season, neither drew a penalty on the field, but Rolle and Weddle were later fined by the N.F.L. after the plays were reviewed.

Boss said he did not sustain a concussion on either play.

“They were definitely a couple of the hardest hits I’ve taken,” he said. “But it’s part of the game.”

Boss expressed support this week for the league’s plan to reform and improve its medical response to brain injuries. “It’s a good thing they are looking into that stuff,” he said.

Boss was drafted in the fifth round from Western Oregon in 2007 and rose in the consciousness of Giants fans late that season when filling in for the injured Jeremy Shockey.

Boss’s 45-yard gain on a catch and run early in the fourth quarter of the Super Bowl against New England was crucial to the drive that put the Giants ahead, 10-7.

Whereas Shockey — now with New Orleans — is expressive and sometimes demanding, Boss is almost the opposite: soft-spoken, self-effacing and seemingly unemotional.

Boss politely denied the claim that he showed little outward passion. “I can’t stay this calm during football games,” he said in a soft voice. “I get fired up.”

He certainly fired up his team against the Falcons by catching five passes for 76 yards, both season highs, tying for second in receptions that day on the Giants with Nicks. Manningham had six.

It was the first time in his career that Boss had caught more than one touchdown pass in a game, and the 28-yarder in the second quarter was the longest scoring play of his career.

But Falcons tight end Tony Gonzalez had the most receptions for either team in that game: eight, for a team-high 82 yards and a touchdown that tied the score with seconds remaining in the fourth quarter. The position has enjoyed a renaissance this season. Gonzalez, in his 13th season, is revered by his peers, and Boss said he wanted to pay personal tribute.

“I kind of looked for him after the game to say hello, but I couldn’t find him,” Boss said. “I grew up watching him play, and it definitely was exciting to see him play live and in person.”