Giants quarterback Eli Manning has been treated for a stress reaction in his right foot that is a result of a continuing problem with plantar fasciitis, a person with knowledge of the condition confirmed Sunday.

The Giants treated Eli Manning for a stress reaction from plantar fasciitis in his right foot.

Manning’s problem is not new, however, and is not expected to keep him from practicing this week or playing Sunday at home against the Dallas Cowboys.

The condition was first reported on Sunday by ESPN.

“Given his foot issues, this is not a surprise,” said the person, who requested anonymity because the team had made no formal statement.

“It doesn’t mean that anything additional will occur.”

A player compensating for pain in the heel could stress another part of the foot and cause further injury.

ESPN reported that the Giants were treating the condition with supportive shoes and the application of a bone stimulator to the cuboid bone of the foot.

Manning was dealing with pain from the condition Oct. 4 at Kansas City, the fourth of five consecutive Giants victories at the start of the season.

He has not missed a game but did not play at his best on Thursday during a 26-6 defeat at Denver. Manning completed 24 of 40 passes for 230 yards and an interception. He was sacked three times and lost the ball on a fumble once as the Giants (6-5) fell for the fifth time in six games.

His two previous games, however, were among Manning’s best of the season. In a 34-31 victory over Atlanta in overtime on Nov. 22, Manning completed 25 0f 39 passes for a career-best 384 yards and 3 touchdowns.

In the game before that, a 21-20 loss to San Diego, Manning had 25 completions in 33 attempts for 215 yards and 2 touchdowns.

Manning is earning $9.4 million this season. Before the season, he agreed to a contract extension to begin next year that will pay him $35 million guaranteed and a total of $97.5 million if he plays the full six seasons of the extension.

The Giants’ backup quarterback is the veteran David Carr. Their third quarterback is Rhett Bomar, who is on the practice squad.

Manning was not available for comment Sunday, the Giants said, but would speak during a previously scheduled news conference Monday.

Against Denver, the Giants played without middle linebacker Antonio Pierce, who has a bulging disk in his neck, and running back Ahmad Bradshaw, who has a sprained left ankle.