 Perhaps the Giants were disoriented by the change of time zones or by the thin air of the Mile High City or by their rare appearance on Thanksgiving.

Their problems -- not all of them their fault -- began early when quarterback Eli Manning called timeout because of to transmission problems with the helmet headset on which he hears the plays.

''That didn't frustrate me,'' Manning said.

But other things might have during a 26-6 loss to the Denver Broncos on Thursday night. Among them were Manning's two fourth-quarter turnovers -- one an interception, one a fumble lost when he was sacked.

Over all, the Giants sustained injuries to their bodies, wounds to their pride, damage to their playoff hopes and taint to their national image. They have lost five of their last six games to fall to 6-5. The Broncos (7-4) ended a four-game losing streak.

Running back Brandon Jacobs, who did not have his best game, said of the Giants' ineffective offense: ''We looked terrible as a unit. We have to play better. If we don't, we'll never have a chance.''

The defense did not look much better. It allowed 373 yards and an average of 5.4 yards per play. Many of them came when Giants defenders appeared to have Broncos surrounded.

That bothered Coach Tom Coughlin. ''We would have people in position, but we weren't getting the ball carriers down,'' he said. ''It was frustrating as heck.''

Coughlin took more time than usual to emerge from the locker room, and seemed to be grasping for positive elements.

''I really don't have a lot of good things to say,'' Coughlin said. ''Lawrence Tynes made a nice, long field goal.''

Indeed he did, from 52 yards, and it cut the Broncos' lead to 16-6 with 31 seconds left in the third quarter, the only time a Giants' comeback seemed plausible.

But they did not score a touchdown for the first time this season, and the trend line is not good. The Giants are 7-9 in their last 16 games, including the last four games of the 2008 regular season and a playoff defeat.

Thursday's loss left the Giants in third place in the National Football Conference East, two games behind the Dallas Cowboys (8-3), their next opponent, on Dec. 6 at Giants Stadium.

The Philadelphia Eagles are second in the division at 6-4. If the standings worry Giants fans, they are not of great concern to defensive end Justin Tuck, who stressed that the Giants still have games remaining against those teams.

''I don't worry,'' Tuck said. ''It doesn't do you any good.''

Among the Giants injured Thursday was DJ Ware, the running back formerly known as Danny Ware.

Ware sustained a concussion in the third quarter when he was tackled after catching a pass and running for a short gain. Earlier, his fumble was recovered by the Broncos, setting up Denver's first touchdown.

Ware was the second-string running back, playing in place of Ahmad Bradshaw, who missed the game with a sprained left ankle after playing most of the season with a fractured bone in the little toe of his right foot.

The starting running back is Jacobs, who failed to block Broncos linebacker Elvis Dumervil when Dumervil knocked Manning to the ground on a sack in the second quarter.

''We have to play harder and not give these football games away,'' Jacobs said. His total of 27 yards on 11 carries was equal to that of Ware's total on four carries. Ware said of his head, ''I'm fine.''

Another injury was to Michael Johnson, a starting safety, who strained his groin while covering a punt. Another defensive back, Corey Webster, had difficult moments.

In the first half, he was penalized for unnecessary roughness, left the game briefly with a knee injury and, when he returned, was penalized for grabbing a face mask.

Manning was sacked three times and completed 24 of 40 passes for 230 yards. ''We can deal with being 6-5, but we need to play better football,'' he said.

His counterpart, Denver's Kyle Orton, was 18 of 28 for 245 yards with one touchdown pass, a 17-yarder to Brandon Stokley. Brandon Marshall caught six passes for 86 yards. 