Perhaps the Giants should budget another half a billion dollars for their new stadium to top it with a retractable roof or a fixed dome.

Discuss the Giants, Jets, fantasy and everything else N.F.L on the Times’s pro football blog.

That way, instead of being a run-oriented team that shuns the pass late in the season in the cold and wintry wind, they could be feared for a year-round air attack in a climate-controlled environment.

Or maybe they should inflate a temporary roof over the current Giants Stadium for the rest of the season to protect the passing game that led them to a 34-31 victory over the Atlanta Falcons on Sunday.

The overtime win — on a 36-yard field goal by Lawrence Tynes — ended a four-game losing streak. It was fashioned by the throwing of Eli Manning and the receptions of his seven receivers.

Manning completed 25 of 39 passes for a career-high 384 yards and 3 touchdowns, two to tight end Kevin Boss, the other to fullback Madison Hedgecock.

Hedgecock, with only one other reception this season, underscored the wonders that came to pass for the Giants on this pivotal day.

Hedgecock finished with two catches for 9 yards. Mario Manningham caught 6 for 126, Boss 5 for 76, Hakeem Nicks 5 for 65, Steve Smith 4 for 79, Brandon Jacobs 2 for 13 and Domenik Hixon 1 for 16.

Afterward, Manningham discussed the common preseason perception that the wide receiver group was a team weakness without Amani Toomer and Plaxico Burress.

“Everybody said how young we were,” Manningham said. “But that doesn’t matter anymore. People can say what they want to. We laugh when they say that. That really doesn’t bother us anymore.”

Unexpectedly, the young receivers have become a strength for the Giants as other areas have faltered. Jacobs, the lead running back, left the game in the second half with an injury to his right leg.

Jacobs said he could have returned; he finished with 39 yards on 12 carries. Ahmad Bradshaw (12 carries, 34 yards) is playing with a fractured bone in the little toe of his right foot.

On defense, the Giants (6-4) were without Antonio Pierce, their middle linebacker and signal caller, who may be out a few weeks with a disk injury in his neck.

The defense squandered a two-touchdown lead in the fourth quarter as quarterback Matt Ryan led the Falcons (5-5) with touchdown passes on back-to-back possessions. Ryan finished 26 of 46 for 268 yards. Defensive end Justin Tuck said, “We’ve still got to learn how to finish games” but “we’re not going to dwell on the negative.”

Tuck brightened when he was asked about the receivers. He recalled the suggestions from some news media and fans that the Giants try to get an established veteran through a trade or free agency.

“This team has a receiver corps that can compete against any receiver corps,” Tuck said. “I really like how these guys have come together. Eli has done a great job of getting them all the ball.”

Nicks is a rookie and a first-round draft choice. His longest catch was a 30-yard gain that set up Boss’s first touchdown, for 28 yards. He lined up next to Smith near the left sideline and forced the Atlanta secondary into single coverage.

Nicks plays with a confident air and said afterward of the receivers: “Each of us brings something unique to the table. We feed off each other.”

Manningham, a second-year player from Michigan, also made one of the game’s shrewdest plays when Manning tried to find him in the end zone on first-and-goal at the Atlanta 7-yard line.

The pass was underthrown and Manningham was covered by cornerback Chris Houston. But Manningham maneuvered in a way that set up a pass interference flag against Houston.

It was like a basketball player drawing a foul in the low post on a rebound. “I tried to go up through his right shoulder so I could get the call,” Manningham said. “I made sure they could call it.”

That set up a 2-yard touchdown run by Jacobs, who continued through the end zone and to the grandstand to present the football to his wife, Kim, in the first row.

“My first time ever to hand it to her,” Jacobs said. “I knew she was excited and I was, too.”

Manning started unevenly. His first drive included a fumble (recovered by Jacobs) and an interception (caught by the Falcons’ Brent Grimes).

But he remained calm, played at a brisk tempo and seemed to see the field well. He praised Boss as “tough as nails” and mentioned that he called his receivers into a special film session Friday.

“Just to try to get guys confident,” Manning said. It was Manning’s first game of 300 or more passing yards in Giants Stadium in a career that began in 2004.

His team gets no break now because the Giants must travel to Denver on Wednesday for a game Thanksgiving night.

Passing might not be so easy in the Mile High City, where a blizzard with two feet of blowing snow is seemingly always in the forecast. Manning spun any Rocky Mountain trepidation like a spiral pass.

“It’s just a matter of taking care of your body on a short week,” Manning said. “It is just everybody getting on the same page.” Thursday’s winner, he said, will be “the team that is physically and mentally ready to play.”