 At the bottom of his locker, Giants offensive right tackle Kareem McKenzie keeps a brown teddy bear he calls Little Bear.

In past seasons, Little Bear has worn bandages, but he displayed none on Wednesday. Neither did the injured McKenzie, who, at 6 feet 6 inches and 327 pounds, could be called Big Bear.

And McKenzie was almost as silent as his mascot when asked to discuss the groin problem that forced him out of last Sunday’s 47-28 defeat at New Orleans.

“What injury?” McKenzie said. “I feel spectacular.”

It was the second injury this season to force McKenzie out of a game. The first was a sprained right knee at Tampa Bay on Sept. 27. But McKenzie recovered quickly and has not missed a start. He and the other four members of the offensive line have started 38 consecutive regular-season games and hope to make it 39 Sunday night when the Giants (5-1) play host to the Arizona Cardinals (3-2) in prime time on national television.

More than most players, McKenzie is evasive when asked to discuss injuries. Sometimes he dodges questions playfully; at other times, he can be curt.

Wednesday was one of those playful days, even when asked about being limited in practice.

“I didn’t know I was limited,” McKenzie said. “I was? They didn’t tell me. I don’t know what’s going on around here.”

Among the reasons the Giants are an elite team is the consistency of the blockers protecting Eli Manning, and how they open space for running backs.

The others in the group of five are left tackle David Diehl, left guard Rich Seubert, center Shaun O’Hara and right guard Chris Snee. All are veterans of at least six seasons.

McKenzie, 30, is in his ninth N.F.L. year. He said he did not realize their streak was 38 games. But he turned a little more serious when discussing implications of it.

“Streaks aren’t important,” McKenzie said. “It’s important to be there for my teammates and not let anyone down. You want to be part of a group that consistently stays on the field.”

When at their best, the linemen play like five fingers on one hand, moving in synchronicity.

“You know what everyone’s doing,” he said. “You’ve been through struggles before. There’s no comfort in me not being on the field. There’s no solace in that situation.”

When McKenzie left Sunday’s game, he was replaced by Will Beatty, a rookie from UConn. Manning was asked how Beatty performed.

“I thought he played well,” Manning said. “He’s got a good feel for what’s going on, knowing the offense and working well with all those guys.”

Coach Tom Coughlin said of Beatty: “He did O.K. He’s a young, talented kid that just needs to play. And, in this particular game, Chris Snee was next to him, so he could help him.”



Middle linebacker Antonio Pierce left practice early with a stiff back. ... The Giants’ safeties spent the early part of practice leaping for high passes thrown by the assistant coach Dave Merritt. Drew Brees threw four touchdowns Sunday. ... Tom Coughlin stood by and watched closely during part of the drill. ...Against the Cardinals on Sunday, the Giants will face one of the N.F.L.’s best passing combinations, Kurt Warner and Larry Fitzgerald. ... Coughlin was less conversational than usual when speaking to the news media before practice. Regarding his pass defense, Coughlin said: “It is always coachable. And we are going to do a better job of that.” He said pass defenders must react not only to the eyes of the receivers but also observe their hands and how they prepare as the ball approaches. ... Running back Ahmad Bradshaw practiced in a limited way Wednesday, which is better than on recent Wednesdays when he wore a protective boot on a sore foot. ... Mario Manningham, the second-year wide receiver, practiced and said he would play Sunday. He left the game in New Orleans and had his ribs X-rayed, the second consecutive game he left early.
