 Among many subplots for Sunday's game between the Giants and the New Orleans Saints is the issue of the tight end Jeremy Shockey, the former Giant who is the leading receiver for the Saints (4-0). Earlier this week, Shockey told The Times-Picayune of New Orleans that he left the Giants with a ''bitter taste in my mouth'' when traded before the 2008 season.

One of the many things that annoyed Shockey was being told to sit in the stands at the Super Bowl in Glendale, Ariz., when the Giants defeated the New England Patriots for the championship after the 2007 season. Shockey was out with a broken leg and wanted to stand on the sideline with his teammates. Mathias Kiwanuka, a defensive end for the Giants, said Wednesday after practice that Shockey was not the only player asked to sit in the stands.

Kiwanuka, like Shockey, was recovering from a broken leg. Like Shockey, he said he heard the request to move from the sideline to the stands. But Kiwanuka said he simply ignored the request.

''Defensive players are known to be a lot more selfish,'' Kiwanuka said. Then, smiling, he added, ''I've just got myself in some trouble.''

Kiwanuka said Shockey, a more visible and controversial player, would have been easily noticed on the sideline. Kiwanuka, not as well established at the time, was able to blend in.

Although much has been said about Shockey's problems with his teammates and upper management, Kiwanuka said Shockey was well-liked in the locker room. He remembered with fondness how Shockey encouraged him to keep his spirits up when Kiwanuka was a rookie and was struggling with his special teams' assignments.

The Giants (5-0) may be healthier for Sunday's game in the Superdome than they have been in a while. Running back Danny Ware (elbow), linebacker Bryan Kehl (finger) and tight end Kevin Boss (ankle) all practiced Wednesday and said they would be able to play. All missed last Sunday's 44-7 victory over Oakland. But Aaron Ross (hamstring) and Michael Boley (knee) remain out.

Quarterback Eli Manning, who played Sunday despite an injury to his right foot, said his father, Archie, is handling all family ticket requests for Sunday's game. Manning grew up in New Orleans when his father played quarterback for the Saints and later announced their games on radio. 