Cowboys tackle Flozell Adams may be disciplined by the N.F.L. for shoving Giants defensive end Justin Tuck in the back and starting an altercation between the two teams Sunday. At the very least, Adams’s deed could prompt a change or a clarification in a league rule about how penalties are assessed after time has expired in a half.

Defensive end Justin Tuck hurt his shoulder after being tripped and knocked down by Dallas’s Flozell Adams in the teams' opening game in September.

Or, perhaps, the league could simply enforce a different provision of the rule that is already in the book.

“There is no place in our game for the act that he took,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said Monday of the incident at the beginning of halftime in the Giants’ 31-24 victory.

After the Cowboys missed a field-goal attempt at the end of the second quarter, Adams pushed Tuck from behind and was penalized for a personal foul.

Officials announced that the penalty was declined by the Giants. The league said Monday that this was in accordance with Rule 4, Section 8, Article 2, Paragraph (c).

It stipulates: “If there is a foul by the offense, there shall be no extension of the period” if the foul takes place on the last play of a half as time expires.

But another section of the rule, Paragraph (d), says a personal foul after the first half “shall be enforced on the ensuing kickoff.”

But an N.F.L. spokesman said Monday night that this part of the rule would be enforced only when the foul occurred later and was “not in the continuing action after the end of a down,” as Adams’s deed was apparently ruled to be.

“There was no option given to us,” Coughlin said. “To say the penalty was declined, that gives the wrong impression.”

The ruling — at least as interpreted by the N.F.L. — exposed a loophole in the letter of the law as opposed to its spirit.

If a defensive team fouled on such a play were to accept a penalty, that would mean walking off yardage and replaying the down. This would give the offending team (in this case, Dallas) another chance to score by virtue of having broken a rule.

That is why assessing a penalty on the second-half kickoff would seem to comply not only with common sense but also with a different portion of the rule.

“From what I understand, that is the only direction you can go in,” Coughlin said. “That particular aspect of the rule has to be addressed.”

Coughlin said he discussed the matter with Mike Pereira, the league’s director of officiating.

“He had already reviewed it, he had already had a meeting with his staff,” Coughlin said. “Mike will be sure that the Competition Committee has it as one of the things that will be reviewed.”

Discipline of Adams is a different matter, and Coughlin would not say if he thought Adams should be suspended. “That is not for me to decide,” he said.

The N.F.L. refused to comment on pending action, but released three previously reported instances this season in which Adams was fined.

The first was in Week 1 against Tampa Bay, $5,000 for unnecessary roughness for striking an opponent on the head.

The second was in Week 2 against the Giants, $12,500 for two kicking fouls, one of them against Tuck that left Tuck with a shoulder injury.

The third was in Week 3 against Carolina, $7,500 for unnecessary roughness, kicking an opponent.

After Sunday’s game, Tuck said that “it takes a coward and some more words that I can’t say right here to push a guy in the back when the play is dead.”

Other Giants confronted Adams and, Tuck added, “he was kind of engulfed on our sideline, so I didn’t get to sneak any cheap shots in.”

After the game, Adams called Tuck “a nobody.” The Cowboys declined to comment Monday, although Coach Wade Phillips said in a news conference, “I’m sure the league will take care of whatever they need to take care of, as we do ourselves.”

Phillips also discussed the fine line of aggression. “It comes down to responsibility sometimes,” he said. “You get overaggressive and get away from your responsibility.”

Phillips said he talked with Adams about the incident at halftime but said, “I’m not going to get into all that” with people asking for more details.

EXTRA POINTS

Giants right guard Chris Snee was “sore, very sore” Monday, Coach Tom Coughlin said. Snee left Sunday’s game with a knee injury Coughlin called “a hyperflexation.” Kevin Boothe was Snee’s replacement and “did a good job,” Coughlin said, adding: “He works hard at his craft. He is a student of the game.”