 During the Giants' recent four-game losing streak, Coach Tom Coughlin did not exchange trash talk with opposing teams. His players were not seen arguing among themselves on the bench.

But Coughlin, whose team broke out of its slump Sunday with a 34-31 victory over Atlanta, is a 63-year-old veteran and mature to a fault. His team reflects his personality.

Coughlin's next opponent, Josh McDaniels of the Denver Broncos, is a 33-year-old rookie head coach, and their contrasts are more than generational.

Although the Giants and the Broncos have the same record (6-4) as they prepare for Thursday night's game in Denver, McDaniels and his players present a different sort of demeanor. That was evident Sunday when the Broncos lost their fourth consecutive game after a 6-0 start.

During warm-ups before a 32-3 loss to San Diego, McDaniels -- according to The San Diego Union-Tribune -- told the Chargers' linebackers, ''We own you.''

During the game, after Denver's Knowshon Moreno, a rookie running back, fumbled near the San Diego goal line, Moreno was scolded on the sideline by his teammate Brandon Marshall.

''We have a lot of emotional players,'' McDaniels said Monday of the Marshall-Moreno moment. ''We don't look to get into altercations on the sideline. That was handled internally.''

McDaniels was less forthcoming about his verbal jousting with the Chargers.

''I am not going to comment on that,'' McDaniels said, adding that he would ''leave that for the Chargers.''

Chargers linebacker Shaun Phillips told The Union-Tribune that McDaniels was ''cocky'' and also said, ''I'm not surprised,'' adding, ''What has he really done in this league?''

McDaniels was part of success in New England, where he worked for Bill Belichick. Another mentor with the Patriots was Charlie Weis, now the embattled Notre Dame coach.

''We don't commiserate, but, yes, we do talk,'' McDaniels said of Weis. ''He is a great friend of mine. He is someone that I will always be friends with.''

Not everyone becomes a friend of McDaniels. When he took over in Denver from Mike Shanahan after last season, he tried to obtain quarterback Matt Cassel from the Patriots. That alienated the incumbent quarterback, Jay Cutler, who was not placated after meeting with McDaniels.

''He made it clear he wanted his own guy,'' Cutler said at the time. ''I thought he was antagonizing me. How can I trust him anymore?''

Cutler ended up being traded to Chicago, and Kyle Orton came to Denver in a deal that also involved first-round draft choices. Orton got off to a respectable start, but did not start Sunday's game because of an ankle injury.

His replacement was Chris Simms, who started his first game in three seasons. After fumbling deep in Chargers territory, Simms was replaced in the second quarter by Orton.

''He was actually fairly mobile or as mobile as Kyle can be,'' McDaniels said. ''Kyle is not an incredibly mobile quarterback to begin with.''

Referring to his first-year experience in general and the current losing streak, McDaniels said: ''It's a tough season. You don't go into it expecting to deal with four-game losing streaks. But I don't know if you go into it expecting six-game winning streaks, either.''

One player around his team for the winning streak was cornerback D. J. Johnson, who was on the practice squad. Johnson was picked up by the Giants on Nov. 11 and is on their roster.

One of Johnson's duties is to help the Giants and their coaches scout the Broncos. The two teams rarely meet (the last time was in 2005), and the Thanksgiving timing means fewer practices.

''I'm all about picked out,'' Johnson said when asked if the Giants have picked his brain. ''You go from being the student to the teacher.''

In the context of the trash-talking allegations, Johnson said of McDaniels, ''He's a good guy, but he's a confident guy, too.'' 