 Giants quarterback Eli Manning said Monday that continuing discomfort in his right foot will not prevent him from practicing regularly or playing next Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys.

''It's been the same for the past three or four weeks,'' Manning said in a conference call with reporters. ''Nothing new. I can go out there and do everything I need to do.''

Manning missed part of a game on Oct. 4 at Kansas City with pain from an ongoing plantar fasciitis condition in his right heel. Since then, he has played in every game but recently developed a stress reaction in another part of the foot.

Manning said his biggest problem from the foot is the time it takes for almost daily treatments in the training room, some of them lasting an hour or more.

The treatments are to prevent a stress fracture that could lead to him not playing. Manning said Monday that he did not anticipate needing surgery in the off-season.

''Not that I know of,'' Manning said. ''I don't think so.'' Of a cure, he said, ''Time and rest are probably the best thing.''

The condition, first reported Sunday on ESPN, is being treated in part with bone stimulation to the cuboid bone. ''I've been playing with it for four weeks,'' Manning said. ''In the games, it doesn't bother me.''

On another topic, Manning was asked about the Denver Broncos, who held a players-only meeting last week to discuss ways to end a four-game losing streak. After the meeting, they beat the Giants, 26-6.

The Giants (6-5) have lost five of their last six and Manning said the Giants have had meetings among themselves recently but added that ''talking doesn't always solve things.''

Defensive end Justin Tuck said on a conference call the Giants players have held a few such meetings in recent weeks but would not say if another is planned for this week.

''There's value in it when it works,'' Tuck said.

Manning, referring to a sense of urgency among Giants players, said, ''We've got to make a jump back to playing great football.''

Referring to fans, he said: ''We've got a lot of people doubting us now. There's probably reason for them to.'' 