Late last week, Bruce Springsteen took the stage at a sports arena north of Detroit and greeted his Michigan audience with a cheerful “Hello, Ohio!”

Rich Rodriguez's training practices are under investigation.

After several more references to the Buckeye State, a bandmate whispered a location correction, and Springsteen (who was born in New Jersey) apologized to the Michiganders.

His timing was ironic. The faux pas came about a week before the annual college football showdown between Michigan and Ohio State, ancient rivals who will play Saturday in Ann Arbor, Mich.

Springsteen’s confusion seemed to underscore the current malaise affecting the Great Lakes State and one of its most prestigious teams.

Michigan has fallen on hard times. As General Motors has declared bankruptcy and unemployment has soared, the Wolverines have suffered a football recession.

“It does seem to be the perfect storm,” Bob Forman, the former executive director of the U-M Alumni Association, said of the football turbulence. “Whether we have the patience to weather this storm, we’ll have to see.”

Michigan (5-6, 1-6 Big Ten) has dropped six consecutive games in the conference and has lost its last five meetings with Ohio State.

If the Buckeyes (9-2, 6-1) win Saturday, Michigan could finish last in the league and out of the postseason bowl picture with its first two consecutive losing seasons since 1962 and 1963.

Behind the scenes, the problems are equally serious. Bill Martin, the director of athletics for 10 years, recently announced his resignation, which will take effect next September. The announcement followed allegations that Martin twice this season made physical contact with young stadium workers who asked to see his credentials before entering a private area for university regents and their guests.

The university said the events were “in no way linked” and that Martin “had been thinking about retirement for a long time.”

There are other problems. Early this week, the university announced that it could not locate log records of practice and workouts for the football team from the 2008 season, its first year under Coach Rich Rodriguez.

The university and the N.C.A.A. are investigating allegations, originally reported in The Detroit Free Press, that Rodriguez and his staff overworked players with extra training sessions.

“I don’t know how anybody could envision this much stuff,” Rodriguez said on Monday during his weekly news conference. “A lot of it did catch me off-guard. That’s not something you see in a manual.”

One of the Buckeyes facing Michigan on Saturday will be offensive lineman Justin Boren, a former Wolverine who transferred to Ohio State shortly after Rodriguez arrived.

Boren, the son of the former Wolverine player Mike Boren, said in an e-mail message to reporters at the time: “Michigan football was a family built on mutual respect and support. Those family values have eroded.” Boren was unavailable for interviews this week.

At Michigan, Martin and Mary Sue Coleman, the university’s president, did not respond to requests for comment about the issues surrounding the program.

“I don’t think it’s very appropriate to talk now, because of the N.C.A.A.,” said Olivia P. Maynard, one of Michigan’s eight-member Board of Regents, who was reached by telephone.

“Think of it from the university’s perspective. There’s all kinds of stuff going on. It doesn’t help to have a thousand voices speaking at the same time.”

More than 100,000 voices will fill Michigan Stadium on Saturday beneath two towers of luxury boxes and club seats that are rising behind the old grandstands. The plush sections will open next season. Opposed by some traditionalists, they will accommodate 16 persons apiece in 82 suites in addition to 3,000 club seats. The top price for a suite is $85,000 annually.

Joe Parker, Michigan’s senior associate athletic director, said by telephone that the university has commitments for 55 of the 82 suites and for 2,300 of the 3,000 club seats, which are being added in a $226 million expansion.

Parker added that “no one has paid in full,” and that the money is not due until Jan. 31, 2010.

Along with the team’s performance, the state’s economic condition could be a factor in eventual sales, he said. He expressed optimism, adding, “Michigan is a brand that expands beyond the borders of our state.”

The university, which has a wide alumni base, has been a football power since Fielding Yost became coach in 1901 and later served as athletic director. One Michigan backer who opposed the expansion is Yost’s grandson, Fielding Yost III, who goes by Duke and works in residential construction, lives in Midland, Mich., and still has two season tickets.

In a telephone interview on Thursday, Yost said the investigation of the football program has been “really a disappointment” because “the football program has always been above reproach.”

But Yost, who has a masters degree in public policy from Michigan, added, “Let’s presume innocence until found guilty.”

He said the new luxury boxes already have increased the volume inside the stadium because sound reverberates off them, although he added that the cheering has decreased considerably since the team’s 4-0 start.

Yost, whose grandfather built the stadium, opposed the luxury seating on grounds of what he called “elitism and stratification,” as well as the practical question of marketing them now.

He said Thursday that he hoped to be proved wrong. “The luxury boxes are a fait-almost-accompli,” Yost said. “Will they be able to sell them? I hope they do.”

Of both the suite sales and Michigan’s football fortunes in general, Yost said, “I hope for success.”