In Thanksgiving games before World War II, the Giants faced teams like the Brooklyn Lions, the Staten Island Stapletons and the football version of the Brooklyn Dodgers.

The Giants last played on Thanksgiving in 1992, losing to Emmitt Smith, left, and Dallas, 30-3.

The Giants' Kent Graham, left, and Tony Tolbert in 1992. The Cowboys hosted their first Thanksgiving Day game in 1966.

But the first one in the lifetime of John Mara, the team’s president and part owner, included a particularly fond memory. It was against the Detroit Lions, and it helped make a young star famous.

“Lawrence Taylor intercepted a pass and ran it back 97 yards to win a game for us,” Mara said. That was a 13-6 Giants victory in 1982 at the Pontiac Silverdome, which was sold at auction this week.

For only the second time since then, the Giants will play on the holiday Thursday night when they visit the Denver Broncos in a game between 6-4 teams.

Thanksgiving football is an American tradition at all levels, but Mara said last spring that he had mixed feelings about traveling so far to play after only three days’ rest from the previous game.

After Mara voiced his concerns to the league, he said fan feedback gave him perspective when the Giants’ circumstances were compared with those of members of the armed forces who are away from their families on the holiday and at war in Iraq and Afghanistan.

“When you think about that, going to Denver to play a football game doesn’t seem like much of a burden,” he said.

If his players are feeling put out, few are expressing it. Many are curious about facing a nonconference opponent in the thin air of the Mile High City, where few of them have played.

Some said they were looking forward to playing on national television in prime time, although the game will be primarily on the NFL Network, which is not available everywhere. The game will also be televised by Channel 11 in the New York metropolitan area.

It will be the third N.F.L. telecast of the day. Defensive end Justin Tuck said, “It will be kind of intriguing,” although he added that he would rather watch football on Thanksgiving than play.

“But I ain’t complaining,” Tuck said as he recalled warm memories of viewing games at home over second helpings of dinner while growing up in Alabama.

“The family has their plates, the game comes on, all the men kind of sit around the TV and all the women are in the kitchen gossiping,” Tuck said.

Quarterback Eli Manning said he last played on Thanksgiving in college for Ole Miss and beat Mississippi State. Cornerback Terrell Thomas did the same for Southern California when it beat Arizona State.

Linebacker Chase Blackburn and offensive tackle David Diehl both recalled Turkey Bowl pickup games with boyhood pals on playgrounds in Ohio (Blackburn) and Illinois (Diehl).

Offensive lineman Kevin Boothe said he did that in a public park in Florida. “A couple times I was a quarterback and a couple other times I was a referee,” Boothe said.

Boothe stopped participating after he went to college at Cornell, but he said his friends still played on the same field. “A lot more injuries happen now than when we were younger,” he said.

Not all Giants grew up with these rituals. Defensive end Mathias Kiwanuka said he would glance at a game, but “I was more of an eat-and-sleep kind of guy — maybe go watch a movie.”

Tuck said that did not surprise him. “He’s from Africa,” Tuck said, referring to Kiwanuka’s background in Uganda. It was similar for defensive end Osi Umenyiora in Nigeria.

Umenyiora said he knew almost nothing there of the American game or the holiday. “Not a lot of thanks going on in Africa,” said Umenyiora, who also grew up in England.

Kicker Lawrence Tynes said he was eager to play in Denver because balls soar in higher altitudes and he kicked four field goals for Kansas City at home in 2006 to help beat the Broncos.

That was the first year the league added a Thanksgiving night game to make its network more attractive. In the league’s early years, Thanksgiving games were more common.

One of the strangest was in Akron, Ohio, in 1952, when the vagabond Dallas Texans, destitute wards of the league in their only season, defeated the Chicago Bears, 27-23, for their only victory.

The Giants are 7-3-3 on Thanksgiving, the most recent being a 30-3 defeat at Dallas in 1992. After the Lions host the day’s early game (against Green Bay this year), the Cowboys host the second (this year against Oakland).

Mara fretted that this would give Dallas, the Giants’ division rival, extra rest for its next game, although, coincidentally, the next Cowboys game this season will be at the Giants, giving both teams the same break.

If the league expands its schedule to 18 games from 16 — a proposal Mara opposes — he said more Thursday games outside of Thanksgiving could be played for television consideration.

Another debate involves dislodging the first two games from their fixed sites in Detroit and Dallas, and rotating them, the way the league does with the third game. Mara also opposes this.

“In Detroit, that’s one game they’re sure to sell out every year,” Mara said. “It’s become so much a part of the tradition out there and even in Dallas. To change that would be a mistake.”

Extra Points

The Giants announced Wednesday that running back Ahmad Bradshaw was out of Thursday night’s game in Denver and would not make the trip. Bradshaw has what the Giants said is at least a sprained left ankle. ... Middle linebacker Antonio Pierce, who missed Sunday’s victory over Atlanta because of a disk injury in his neck, is in California, the Giants said, to get a second medical opinion. Pierce is listed as out for Thursday and the Giants did not know if he would attend the game.