A Giants fan, or opponent, might ask: who is the hardest-hitting tackler on the Giants’ defense, the player most feared by other teams? Perhaps it is a trick question.

Linebacker Jonathan Goff (54), tackling Oakland's Jonathan Holland, is a special-teams standout who could assume a larger role.

Giants linebacker Danny Clark with the Saints' Jeremy Shockey. Clark has mentored his backup, the rookie Clint Sintim.

The answer could be none of them, which is part of the reason much of the defense might be rearranged Sunday when the Giants (6-5), who have lost five of their last six games, host the Dallas Cowboys (8-3).

At least three starting positions could feature new names: Jonathan Goff at middle linebacker for Chase Blackburn, Mathias Kiwanuka at end for Osi Umenyiora, and Chris Canty at tackle for Fred Robbins.

Bill Sheridan, the first-year defensive coordinator, said last week that his players “look like world-beaters” on some downs, but not often enough.

“That is as frustrating as anything, just the inconsistency,” Sheridan said. “When guys are missing tackles, people are going to gain first downs and get extra yards.”

The problem was particularly acute in the Giants’ last game, on Thanksgiving night in Denver, when the defense gave up 373 yards and 23 first downs in a 26-6 loss to the Broncos.

Coach Tom Coughlin did not formally announce starting lineup changes. But a move to the second string in practice sent a message to a unit that is ranked fourth in the N.F.L. in total defense.

Blackburn said he was not happy about his demotion. “But it’s part of football,” he said. “They may want to see what Jon can do.”

Goff, his replacement, is a second-year player who has delivered hard hits on special teams. But Goff will assume a more complex job without much professional experience.

“I am a versatile player,” Goff said. “Whatever the team needs me to do — special teams, defense — I am ready.”

Danny Clark, the strongside linebacker, said of Goff: “He’ll go out there and be physical and get us lined up and make some plays. He has what it takes.”

The middle linebacker position was manned in recent seasons by Antonio Pierce, who missed the last two games with a bulging disk in his neck and went on injured reserve Monday.

Pierce is 31 and a veteran of nine seasons. Should he be unable to return next season, the Giants need to know whether Goff can handle that job. If not, they will need to fill it through the draft, a trade or free agency.

The 32-year-old Clark, a 10-year veteran in the last year of his contract, also faces an uncertain future.

His backup is the rookie Clint Sintim, a second-round draft choice who has played in six games and is probably being groomed as Clark’s successor.

“I’ve been through this before, where they draft guys to take my place,” said Clark, who has played for five N.F.L. teams.

Rather than be resentful, Clark has become a tutor. “Danny’s a quality dude,” Sintim said. “I can’t say enough about him. He’s been a great help in trying to help me figure it out.”

The Giants have reason to speed Sintim’s progress. When he played at Virginia, the 6-foot-2, 256-pound Sintim said, “I was more physical than most players I played against.”

Clark said there was not much about technical football he could teach Sintim, who is big and skilled enough. So he said he led by example and offered friendship.

“I teach him the mental aspect, how to be a professional,” Clark said.

“When you reach out and give, it comes back to you tenfold. What you give, you grow. And what you keep, you lose.”

Sheridan said the situation could be awkward because “Danny is used to being a starter and playing all the first- and second-down snaps,” and Sintim’s chances broke up Clark’s routine.

“But he has a great attitude towards it, and he is actually trying to mentor Clint and bring him along,” Sheridan said.

Sheridan was the linebackers coach last season but was promoted when Steve Spagnuolo became the St. Louis Rams’ head coach. The transition has not gone entirely smoothly.

Before training camp, Sheridan said he would call plays from a coaching booth upstairs, a plan vetoed by Coughlin after Pierce said he preferred to work with a coordinator on the sideline. Shortly before the season, Umenyiora walked out of practice after a dispute with Sheridan. He apologized and was fined upon his return.

And last week brought another rumble. It came on the NFL Network telecast when the color analyst Matt Millen reported that Sheridan had told him that the Giants’ defense did not play with enough consistent physicality.

Sheridan repeated it last week. “The players know that,” Sheridan said. “They watch the same film.”

But at least one of them, defensive end Justin Tuck, seemed to take offense.

“I disagree,” Tuck told The Daily News. “Everybody has an opinion. Maybe I’m completely wrong by saying I disagree.”

Tackle Barry Cofield seemed to agree with Sheridan, saying the Giants “really just didn’t show up” for the Denver game, although he added, “I hesitate to say guys aren’t taking their jobs seriously.”

Cofield added: “You have to hit the reset button. I can’t say we are out there smashing people’s faces in. I hope guys aren’t resting too much on what’s been done in the past.”

That would be a reference to the Super Bowl championship that capped the 2007 season and the 11-1 start last year. Since then, the Giants are 7-9, including one playoff loss.

Sheridan’s promotion was one of many off-season moves on defense. Canty, linebacker Michael Boley, tackle Rocky Bernard and safety C. C. Brown were signed as free agents by General Manager Jerry Reese. None of them have excelled.

Because safeties Kenny Phillips and Michael Johnson are injured, Brown could start Sunday. Earlier in the season, he looked overmatched in pass coverage. Boley and Canty have missed significant time with injuries.

Umenyiora, Robbins and Cofield are returning from knee surgery and may not be at full strength.

But the defense’s woes may be more than physical. Before Pierce was injured, he complained of communication problems on defense, a word occasionally echoed by teammates.

When a defense declines as steeply and rapidly as the Giants have since their 5-0 start, the blame can cascade from the line of scrimmage through the coaching staff to the front office.

Coughlin said last week that “football to me is the physical aspect of stopping the run and running the ball,” and praised the Cowboys as “a physical football team.”