Despite the defensive success that has helped elevate the Giants to a place among the N.F.L. elite, their defensive backfield has often been overlooked.

It has lacked the collective personality of their defensive line and the forceful persona of middle linebacker Antonio Pierce, the captain of the defense.

So as the Giants (5-0) prepared last week for Sunday’s game against the Saints (4-0) in New Orleans, cornerback Corey Webster was asked about the contributions of the smaller, quicker players who chase after pass receivers.

“We’ve had a great D-line around here for years, but I think we’re kind of catching up to the play of those guys, trying to play at their level,” Webster said. “I think we’re doing a pretty good job. So far, so good.”

His qualifying caveat was appropriate. The Giants’ defense has allowed a league-low average of 210.6 yards per game and a league-low average of 104.8 passing yards.

But unlike the struggling foes the Giants have beaten in recent weeks, the Saints lead the N.F.L. in scoring average with 36 points per game.

Behind quarterback Drew Brees, the Saints also rank third in offense with an average of 414.2 yards per game and are 11th in passing with an average of 248 yards.

Brees and the Saints will test not only Webster on the edge but also Terrell Thomas, the second-year cornerback who replaced the injured Aaron Ross.

Brees also will work against the safeties C. C. Brown, a free-agent acquisition who has replaced the injured Kenny Phillips, and Michael Johnson, a holdover from last season.

In addition to having wide receivers Marques Colston, Devery Henderson and Robert Meachem at his disposal, Brees can also throw to tight end Jeremy Shockey and running back Reggie Bush.

Shockey, a former Giant, leads the Saints in receptions with 18; Henderson has the most receiving yards, 235; and Colston is at the top in touchdown receptions with 3.

Bill Sheridan, the Giants’ defensive coordinator, said Brees “does a good job of spreading it around” in multiple sets and “is too smart” to focus on just one or two receivers. Brees also can release passes more quickly than many quarterbacks.

But Thomas, at least as confident as he is talented, said “it actually plays to our advantage” to face top competition and that the absence of Ross and Phillips is not a worry.

“We’ll be prepared,” Thomas said. “They’re a great group of receivers. It’s a big marquee game and whatnot, but it’s just another week in the N.F.L.”

Thomas played one of his best games last week in a 44-7 victory over the Oakland Raiders. First, he made a shoulder tackle of tight end Zach Miller to prevent a first down. Next, he stripped the ball from quarterback JaMarcus Russell to cause a turnover on a blitz. Later, he raced back to knock down a long pass to Louis Murphy on the Giants’ 10.

“I’m just feeling comfortable and I’m feeling confidence from the other guys,” Thomas said. “The coaches are putting trust in me.”

Along with missing Phillips, who might have helped cover Shockey, the Giants will play without Michael Boley, an injured linebacker whose mobility helped the pass defense.

Kevin Dockery, a cornerback who plays in passing situations when five or six defensive backs are used, said it might take more than one defender to stop Shockey.

“Put someone over his head so he can’t release as easily,” Dockery said. “Be aware of where he is. When he catches the ball, you’ve just got to issue the hit to him before he brings it to you.”

Sharing that responsibility could be Brown, who said he was enjoying duties against deep passes instead of being typecast as primarily a run-stopper, as he was with the Houston Texans.

Against the Raiders, Brown ran the length of the field for what he hoped was a touchdown after he stripped the ball from running back Justin Fargas. As Brown fell exhausted in the distant end zone, the play was nullified when the officials ruled it had ended when the runner’s progress stopped.

“I thought for a second they were going to have to bring the stretcher out there and get me up off the field,” Brown said.

Pierce said it was difficult to say whether a defensive backfield excels because of pressure on the quarterback or if the rest of the defense excels because the defensive backs shut down a quarterback’s targets.

“We are like a chain, a strong chain,” Pierce said. “It all goes together. You just can’t isolate the D-line or the secondary.”

Pierce said that Webster was among the elite cornerbacks in the N.F.L., that Thomas was playing well and that Johnson was working hard.

“You look at how young they are and how aggressive they are toward the ball,” Pierce said. “That goes hand in hand with our rush.”

Webster said the spirit of the unit grew from two former Giants: the backups Sam Madison and R. W. McQuarters, who encouraged young players to practice as if they were first-stringers.

Dockery, in a similar role now, said the defensive backs “push each other every day not to be good but to be great.”

He added, “It’s friendly competition, but it is competition.”

Dockery also warned that Brees “is smart and savvy” and finds receivers who do not appear to be open.

“If you’re a competitor, you love a challenge,” Dockery said. “We’re ready to step up.”