 Fiat will set a new direction at Chrysler, which finished its tour through bankruptcy court Wednesday, completing its deal to join forces with the Italian automaker.

At Ford, a chief executive brought in from the aircraft industry is helping to shake up the company.

But it will be up to the federal government, which will own a majority of General Motors when it emerges from bankruptcy, to tackle what is perhaps the most difficult challenge in Detroit: transforming G.M.'s insular culture -- at times as bureaucratic as the government's -- to make the company more competitive.

If the effort fails, the Treasury may never recoup the $50 billion it has provided G.M.

''Addressing cultural issues is just as fundamental to our assignment as addressing the balance sheet or financing,'' said Steven Rattner, the lead adviser to the White House on the automobile industry.

In just one example, whenever a top G.M. executive was called to appear before lawmakers in Washington, staff members would prepare a briefing binder as thick as a Manhattan phonebook and hold multiple meetings to strategize over five minutes of testimony (Fritz Henderson, the new chief executive, has told employees to stop doing that).

In a Senate hearing Wednesday, Ron Bloom, another adviser on the auto task force, also talked about the need for G.M. to break longstanding habits that have made the company, with its bloated structure, lose a step to more nimble competitors.

''General Motors has been kicking problems down the road for a long time,'' Mr. Bloom said.

Mr. Rattner and other government officials have repeatedly said they have no interest in running the company day-to-day. But they are taking a keen interest in shaping the new leadership team.

For example, Mr. Rattner himself was behind the appointment Tuesday of Edward E. Whitacre, the former chief executive at AT&T, to become G.M.'s new chairman. Four more vacancies on the board also have to be filled.

The newcomers' primary task will be to make sure that G.M. rewires the corporate DNA that led to a decades-long slide in market share and tens of billions of dollars in losses.

Mr. Rattner said he expects no less than the kind of wholesale restructuring that John F. Welch Jr. engineered at General Electric in the 1980s, where he decisively shed businesses, cut costs and jobs and demanded better performance.

The government, which has said it will not invest any more money in G.M., cannot settle for anything less, Mr. Rattner said in an interview.

''We're not going to fail,'' he added. ''This is too important a company.''

If G.M.'s history is any guide, outsiders can have trouble making a difference. For a quarter-century, a parade of executives and activist investors, including H. Ross Perot, the billionaire Kirk Kerkorian and his adviser, the restructuring expert Jerome B. York, has failed to shake things up at the highest level.

Those brought into the company to help invigorate it, like Ronald L. Zarrella, the Bausch & Lomb executive who ran its marketing, and the Chicago lawyer Elmer W. Johnson, who held a top executive job at G.M., ultimately left the company.

In a famous memo that circulated in Detroit during the late 1980s, Mr. Johnson complained that the company was hampered by its inability to execute.

''Teamwork has been replaced by Balkanization,'' he wrote. ''Our culture discourages open, frank debate among G.M. executives in the pursuit of problem resolution.''

Even within hours of seeking bankruptcy protection on June 1, the company showed old habits that seemed out of sync with its new, humbled circumstances.

G.M.'s chief financial officer, Ray Young, told reporters that as a ''privately held company,'' G.M. was not required to regularly disclose details on its financial performance -- even though its new owners were in fact American and Canadian taxpayers, the United Automobile Workers union and G.M. bondholders. 

After Canadian officials and taxpayer advocates protested, G.M. retreated a day later, promising to make regular disclosures.

Through the years, outsiders and even company insiders have complained about the months of study required for simple decisions, like making design changes to a bumper or headlights.

Government officials are vetting new board members who will join Mr. Whitacre, who admits he has no car industry experience, in providing oversight of Mr. Henderson, the successor to Rick Wagoner, who was forced to resign as chief executive by the Treasury in March.

Mr. Henderson must now prove that he can make good on his promise to make G.M. leaner and faster. Government officials decided to give him the title of chief executive, rather than interim chief, to reassure G.M. troops who were rattled by Mr. Wagoner's abrupt departure.

Historically, G.M.'s senior leadership group, made up of about 100 managers, met in person four times a year. Since taking over on March 30, Mr. Henderson has held three conference calls with the group, in which he has stressed the need for change and pushed managers to speed up decision-making, said G.M.'s chief spokesman, Steven J. Harris.

Mr. Henderson is leading by example. Upon receiving memos from Mr. Harris proposing action on various matters, he told Mr. Harris not to send similar notes in the future, but instead to provide an informational copy once a decision has been made.

Mr. Harris said he disagreed that G.M.'s board had refrained from scrutinizing company activities, as government officials have implied in public comments.

''They just had a different take on things,'' he said. ''We understand that this is a new environment and that we're likely to undergo a deeper level of scrutiny.''

Measuring any progress in changing the culture will take time. The results, after all, will be seen in the new vehicles that the company develops and produces -- and whether they reflect world-class business practices that are required to win against the best of its global competitors.

''It's not uncomplicated,'' Mr. Rattner said. ''We hope and believe that it can take place.'' 