WHEN Fritz Henderson found out in March that he was replacing Rick Wagoner as chief executive of General Motors, he did something it’s very likely no recent G.M. chief executive ever did on the day he was promoted. He flew home commercial.

For Mr. Henderson and many other business travelers, lofty or lowly, this is the year of the downgrade. In tough economic times, their trips have become shorter, less frequent and less luxurious.

Corporate jets have been sold. First-class tickets have been traded for seats in the back of the plane. Hotel suites have been exchanged for single rooms in budget chains. At dinnertime, expensive bottles of wine have been replaced with drinks by the glass. And anything with “spa” in the name has become a much tougher sell to vigilant accounting departments than it was just a few months ago.

Companies in the travel business are feeling the pinch. Airlines like Continental and hotel chains like Marriott International are collecting as much as 20 percent less per booking than they did a year ago, according to first-quarter earnings reports on the companies’ Web sites.

For those who are still making business trips, there are bargains to be had. Meeting planners say companies are demanding — and getting — lower room rates and extras they once had to pay for, like breakfast items at morning meetings. Some companies even want permission to bring in their own food, once unthinkable in booking an event, to keep costs down.

Other companies are taking advantage of the weakness in the travel market to negotiate hotel rate deals as far ahead as two years from now, said Frank Schnur, vice president of global advisory services for American Express Business Travel, which tracks business travelers’ spending habits. “A buyer’s market emerged at the end of last year and is in full force today,” he said.

Still, for many business travelers, the difficult new environment has meant creative adjustments as well.

Tana Trichel, chief executive of the Northeast Louisiana Economic Alliance, likes to entertain guests at a pricey restaurant whenever she attends conferences to promote her region.

But on a recent trip to Chicago, Ms. Trichel took her guests to Smoque BBQ, a restaurant on the northwest side of town that is known for its Texas-style meats. The bill, which would have been hundreds of dollars at a typical white-tablecloth establishment, was only $50 for three heaping platters of ribs, brisket, coleslaw and peach cobbler. And the group drank beer, brought in from a nearby store, instead of a fine Bordeaux.

“A really fine dining experience historically has been a special treat as I travel all over the country,” Ms. Trichel said. “But you can have a really rich and fine experience at a barbecue house.”

Other adjustments can be more painful, especially for travelers used to ordering up the company plane. After years of flying privately, with special meals and attentive service, they find themselves in unfamiliar public territory.

That was true for Mr. Henderson, who like other auto industry executives was stung by a Congressional rebuke last fall, when it emerged that they traveled in their private planes to Washington to seek a bailout. “It’s almost like seeing a guy show up at the soup kitchen in high hat and tuxedo,” said Representative Gary L. Ackerman, Democrat of New York, at the time.

G. M., Ford and many other companies have since rid themselves of their jets, to save face or money or both. And the situation has presented an opportunity not just for big airlines, but also for low-fare ones like JetBlue Airways.

The company has made a special effort to court business travelers in the last year, through an advertising campaign and a tongue-in-cheek instruction manual, posted on its Web site. It promises: “JetBlue’s fares start at very low prices. Let’s just say, they’re way, way, way less than the $5,300 an hour you used to pay for your private jet.”

It’s clear that business travelers are focusing on spending much less. Continental Airlines, which has a hub at Newark Liberty International Airport and whose flights blanket the country, is finding that the travelers it used to count on to book seats in first class are being told by their companies to reserve seats in coach.

It blamed the downgrades, as well as travelers’ decisions to forgo trips altogether, for its loss of $136 million during the first three months of 2009. Overall passenger revenue for the quarter fell 18.8 percent, compared with the first quarter of 2008.

The switch from the front to the back of the plane and from suite to single room is reflected in steep declines in the prices travelers paid during the first quarter for airfares and hotel rooms, according to American Express Business Travel.

Last year, airfares averaged $246 each way, the highest in the past five years, because of the steep climb in fuel prices over the spring and summer. But in the first quarter of this year, travelers paid only $213, after fuel prices came down and companies began to limit travel in the wake of the recession.

Likewise, hotel spending dropped both for domestic and international trips. At home, the average for a hotel room fell to $180 a night in the first quarter of 2009, from $208 in 2008. Overseas, travelers paid an average of $228 a night during the first quarter of 2009, down from $252 a night in 2008, American Express Business Travel said.

But Marriott, for one, has not been daunted by the economic downturn. It recently announced plans to introduce its Renaissance brand in Europe, the site of some of its most aggressive expansion, including a new hotel to open next year near London’s St. Pancras International station, home of the Eurostar train.

Marriott’s range of brands gives the company a variety of opportunities to hang on to business travelers, who can still book within the hotel chain even if they are forced to spend less.

Some smaller properties near major metropolitan areas are trying to capitalize on corporate willingness to look for bargains. They are pitching themselves as alternatives to high-end resorts and big-city hotels. One such region is the Berkshires in Massachusetts, a two-and-a-half hour drive from New York.

The region is dotted with small hotels and bed and breakfasts that corporate planners might have overlooked in the past as too modest or as lacking the facilities prized by business travelers.

“We are getting companies that normally would not look at our hotels consider us because we do not have resort or spa in our name,” said Brian Butterworth, director of sales for the Red Lion Inn in Stockbridge, Mass., and its sister hotel, the Porches Inn in North Adams, Mass.

Yet the Red Lion has a massage therapist on staff, emphasizes locally grown food in its restaurant and can provide extras like free Wi-Fi or breakfast as part of the room price, Mr. Butterworth said.

He and other hotel operators say last-minute corporate bookings have soared as companies and state governments wait to decide whether it’s necessary to send employees on the road.

Staff members at Wisconsin Public Radio, a network of 29 stations, are considered government employees and have been used to the limits that such workers face on business trips, said Michael Leland, the network’s news director.

Now, the bigger question is whether they can go at all. “It’s more that trips are being watched closely, rather than spending on the trips,” Mr. Leland said.

There’s no question that some businesspeople will be hitting the road, said Evelyn Hannon, editor of Journeywoman.com, a Toronto-based Web site that specializes in tips for women travelers. “If you’re the C.E.O., it’s important; you need to go and do,” she said. “But if you’re an underling, you’re not traveling as much as before, and if you do, you’re not going first class.”

Airfare deals are relatively easy to find. But economizing on the ground isn’t natural for many business travelers, to whom the opportunity to put a plush room or a pricey meal on an expense account made up for time spent away from loved ones.

This is where it behooves business travelers to become creative. In many cases, spending limits simply prohibit picking up the phone and ordering room service.

In that case, Ms. Hannon had one basic piece of advice: get out of the hotel room. Rather than spend $15 on a continental breakfast from room service, or even more on a hot meal, she advises taking an evening stroll, finding the nearest Starbucks or coffee shop, picking up yogurt, fruit and a muffin or bagel for the morning at a fraction of the room service price, and stashing them in the minibar.

Overseas travel offers even more opportunities for saving on a budget. European and Asian cities abound with department stores that have large food sections and even entire food floors.

Along with saving money, these outings provide a respite from the usual business travel routine. “Anyone can get in a taxi and say, ‘take me to the finest restaurant,’ ” Ms. Hannon said.

If venturing out is too much to ponder after a long day of meetings, another kind of room service has emerged: food delivery Web sites that offer a chance to sample local restaurants. Seamlessweb.com serves 14 cities, including New York, Boston and San Francisco; Labite.com serves Los Angeles; and Just-eat.co.uk covers London.

In any case, Ms. Hannon said, business travelers should shift their attitudes from complaining about new limits on meal and hotel spending to seeing what they can make of the situation.

“Believe me, even if this was the way it’s going to be for the rest of time, it’s still not bad. It’s just not the top, top, top that you’re used to,” she said. “And the longer this goes on, the more changes the industry will make to respond to the new reality.”

It may take some time for corporate jets, the most blatant symbol of company spending, to regain their stature, said Robert W. Mann Jr., an aviation industry consultant in Port Washington, N.Y.

“For people who really have a productive use for business jets, they continue to use business jets,” he said. “But the 35 percent of people who are just in it for the wow factor, they can’t justify it anymore. He defined the wow factor as corporate executives who use the company plane for a weekend trip home to Seattle or those who say, “Hey, honey, let’s go to Palm Beach.”

But Mr. Mann said he did not think corporate jets would be outcasts forever. “When the media starts writing about optimism instead of optics, the whole thing will reverse, and you’ll see pent-up demand shoot through the roof. It will be, ‘Why aren’t we using the jet?’ and ‘Can we get it back?’ ” he said.
