United Airlines sued its pilots’ union on Wednesday, asking it to halt slowdowns that it said had led to the cancellation of hundreds of flights in the last 10 days.

The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Chicago, seeks a preliminary injunction against the Air Line Pilots Association and four pilots — Steven Tamkin, Robert Domaleski Jr., Xavier F. Fernandez and Anthony R. Freeman — claiming that the union and the pilots had organized an effort to encourage pilots to call in sick.

The airline said the union was conducting a “public campaign of intimidation” meant to discourage pilots from filling in for the pilots who used their sick time, “effectively engaging in a slowdown.”

United said it was trying to avoid a repeat of a similar slowdown that occurred eight years ago, which led to what came to be known as the “summer from hell” for airlines.

The action by pilots in 2000 cost United hundreds of millions of dollars, and contributed to a financial slide that eventually landed the airline in bankruptcy protection.

United, the second-largest domestic airline behind American, said the campaign had been under way for a year but had accelerated in recent weeks. United said it had canceled 329 flights from July 19 to 27, disrupting plans for 36,000 travelers whose planes had no pilots to fly them.

The cancellations cost the airline $8 million in lost revenue and $3.9 million in lost profit, it said in the lawsuit.

“United simply cannot afford a repeat of the summer of 2000 and its impact on the company’s customers and employees,” United said.

United’s cancellation record through May of this year was not much worse than that of the rest of the industry. United canceled 2.59 percent of its 2008 flights, according to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, compared with the industry average of 2.36 percent, while 73 percent of its flights arrived on time, versus the industry average of about 74 percent.

The pilots’ union said it had no comment.

The airline said Mr. Freeman organized a group of pilots known as the “2172” because they were among the 2,172 pilots laid off by United in 2001 after the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, in which United lost two planes.

United said it believed that Mr. Freeman had staged the campaign, via a private Web site, “in order to force United to abandon its fleet and furlough plans as necessitated by the current economic climate.”

United, which lost $2.7 billion in the second quarter, is on a drive to cut spending and jobs, including pilots’ jobs, in the wake of record prices for jet fuel, which have nearly doubled since summer 2007.

United’s contract with its pilots’ union, reached while it was under Chapter 11 protection, expires in 2009.

Union officials have said they want to reopen the pact before then, saying they are working under a “draconian contract and work rules.”

Under the Railway Labor Act, airline union members cannot strike until their contracts expire and an impasse has been declared. A cooling-off period must then take place before a walkout can be called.

As a result, workers often resort to slowdowns or refuse to work overtime, prompting lawsuits by the airlines.

United, Delta and American have all sued their workers over the years to end slowdowns. United did not sue its pilots in 2000, however.

Officials at United, which is a unit of UAL, said they tried to negotiate with the pilots’ union, known as ALPA, before filing the lawsuit, but said the union broke off the negotiations this week.

United said the rate of sick leave among some of its co-pilots is up 103 percent this summer, while pilots in general are picking up much less additional flying time than in previous years. In 2006, pilots were five times more likely to fly additional trips compared with this summer, United said.

United said the highest number of pilots on sick leave during May was about 350. It said that the number of pilots who called in sick rose from 325 on June 5 to a high of 538 during the weekend of July 19, and that the figures had not dropped significantly since then. 