ON a Friday afternoon this summer, I left the gleaming, tile-walled kitchens of the Cordon Bleu cooking school in Ottawa feeling triumphant, toting containers full of lobster in a delicate verbena cream sauce that I had just prepared. I confidently felt it was as good as anything I’d ever tasted in a restaurant.

Only a day later, I dragged myself out the school’s door, utterly dejected. I left behind an entire platter of skate, ruined by a sauce whose flaws had been pointed out to me in great detail, though with kindness, by my instructor.

My two days at the Canadian branch of the Paris cooking school, its only outpost in North America, provided an opportunity to sample the teaching techniques that earned Cordon Bleu its vaunted reputation. It also taught me the highs and, sadly, the lows that the professional kitchen can provoke.

This school began in 1988 as Eleanor’s Cuisine Française, directed by Eleanor Orser, a graduate of the original Cordon Bleu. Later that year, it became officially affiliated with the Paris school and, in 1999, moved into its present location, an 1870s Tudor revival mansion in the Sandy Hill section of Ottawa.

(There are other campuses in Britain, Korea, Japan and Australia, as well as a group of American schools that are affiliated with, but not run by, the Paris school.)

Of course, the school’s main task is to train chefs, bakers and caterers for the restaurant world, and it offers six different diplomas, including the degree that Julia Child earned in Paris (a replica hangs on a stairway wall at the Ottawa branch) — a story immortalized in her book “My Life in France,” and in the recent movie “Julie & Julia.”

But Le Cordon Bleu, or L.C.B. as its students call it, also offers a wide variety of nonprofessional classes that last from a few hours to a day or a week. Some focus on seasonal cooking, like a class in making a Bûche de Noël, the decadent log-shaped Christmas cake, and others on international cuisines, like Thai or German, and still others on specific culinary genres, like soups and sauces. Professional classes are also open to those with no experience.

“I like to teach the public, because they start from nothing,” said Gilles Penot, one of my instructors.

I wasn’t starting “from nothing,” exactly. I’ve always liked to cook and regularly take courses to improve my skills. But I wanted to see if Cordon Bleu lived up to its worldwide reputation. I signed up for a pair of classes, including one that included a trip to Ottawa’s permanent farmers’ market.

Based on my previous cooking classes, I expected we would be given elaborate recipes with step-by-step instructions. That was not the case. The Cordon Bleu recipe sheets only provide a list of ingredients in the order they will be needed. Students learn by watching their instructor, asking questions and copying the steps.

While there is plenty of personal supervision, it also helps to arrive with an instinctive understanding of which pan to use, the correct way to use a knife and how to use a flat gas stovetop (the burners are hotter toward the middle, and whatever you do, don’t put your hand down on it).

The first class, based on a visit to the farmers’ market, began in style. At precisely 9 a.m., I met up with the other two students and our instructor, Daniel Verati. He began by offering us water, coffee or a flute of Canadian ice wine (I saved that for later).

We soon left for the market, where we happily trotted behind Mr. Verati as he dispensed tips. At the window of Saslove’s, a butcher shop, he pointed out various products made with foie gras. At another stand, he talked about Quebec’s growing club of artisanal cheese makers. Finally, we made our way to LaPointe Fish, a shop that has been in business since 1867, and picked up live lobsters and a bright red filet of Arctic char.

Back at the school, Mr. Verati quickly turned the char into tartare — drawing close scrutiny from a fellow student, Simon Bridge, who eagerly sought the chef’s knife expertise. After preparing our dessert, a panna cotta that we left to chill, we moved on to the main course, lobster.

The chef picked up one of the live lobsters by its back, advising — and showing — us how to check its underside to see if it was male or female, in case there might be roe, a treasured find. He told us to lower it headfirst into the boiling water. “Do it fast,” he said.

Within minutes, our lobsters were bright red and fully cooked; they became the basis of an incredibly rich dish that paired the lobster meat with an intense cream sauce that we flavored with lobster shell, meat and a dried herb called verveine, more commonly known as verbena.

The cooking complete, the chef set up a buffet of the tartare, the lobster and the panna cotta. He poured flutes of ice wine and invited us to dig in. We were free to take home the leftovers (the school encourages students to bring plastic storage containers, so it helps to have access to a refrigerator).

Though he had hoped for more complicated dishes, Mr. Bridge said the class had broadened his knowledge.

“I had not even heard of verveine, let alone used it in cooking,” he said. “It was a wonderfully unexpected taste.”

The excitement of my success with the lobster, however, faded the next day with my second class.

This one, called Flavors of France, was more elaborate: about 25 people — watching on TV screens placed throughout the classroom — looked on as Mr. Penot cooked an array of classic French dishes at a workstation at the front of the room. They included an appetizer made with skate, a seared rack of lamb and a poached pear dessert with a cream sauce.

The class, which was supposed to last two hours in two parts (demonstration, followed by a hands-on section), ran three and a half. At times, it felt like being on a set of an upscale cooking show, with cameras zooming in as the chef showed how to clean the lamb bones and turn sugar and water into caramel.

At one point, someone in the crowd gasped as a knife nicked close by his finger, but Mr. Penot merely shrugged.

“I’ve cut myself 20 or 30 times, but so what?” he told us. “The skin grows back. As I tell my students, if you cut your finger, you have nine more.”

The audience, equally divided between men and women, included Peter Hollands, a Canadian high school vocational education teacher who spends his winters near the Arctic Circle, teaching native tribes. Finding recipes for his students can be a challenge, Mr. Hollands said, and he came to the class for inspiration.

“These are works of art, as well as being food,” he said of the dishes prepared by Mr. Penot.

Seven of us who signed up for the full class, not just the demonstration portion, stayed on to cook, and we paired up to take on the skate, which was poached in milk and accompanied by a gribiche, a sauce made from hard-boiled egg yolks, mustard, vinegar and olive oil.

In the demo, Mr. Penot cautioned us that the egg yolk needed to be completely cool before it could meet up with the mustard and the oil, which must be added drop by drop, as the ingredients are mixed together.

But my egg yolk apparently had not cooled enough, nor had I properly pushed it through a finely meshed sieve. All around me, I heard murmurs in the background that other students’ sauces were “breaking.”

I soon found out what that meant. My sauce didn’t emulsify, and instead divided into oil and a glob of other ingredients. Dan Tran, a full-time student at the school who was assisting the chef, rushed to my assistance, but the sauce broke once more.

Soon, Mr. Penot arrived at my side, confident that he could solve the problem. But the sauce refused to emulsify even for the chef. “You have too much oil,” he declared.

But I used oil that was pre-measured, I protested.

“It happens to all of us,” he said, in consolation. “Sometimes I have to cook something 30, 40 times before I get it right.”

Still, I walked back to my hotel in a funk, leaving behind all the food I had tried to cook. I felt that if I could not master a basic gribiche, my culinary future was bleak.

That evening, still blue, I sat in Restaurant 18, where the kitchen is run by Matthew Carmichael, one of Ottawa’s well-regarded young chefs. Willing to be adventurous, I ordered seared elk, a special on the menu that night and a favorite with local diners.

The slices of rare meat had a charred exterior and sat in a pool of a perfectly prepared soubise, a sauce made from puréed cooked onions that looked and tasted like liquid velvet.

I stared at it, put down my fork and, for a moment, silently wept. At least I had memories of my lobster dish to console me.

INTO THE KITCHEN

Le Cordon Bleu Ottawa (453 Laurier Avenue East; 888-289-6302; www.lcbottawa.com) is in the Sandy Hill area, a pleasant walk of 15 minutes or so from downtown. Participants are advised to wear comfortable shoes, long-sleeved shirts and full-length trousers. Bring plastic storage containers for leftovers.

Upcoming classes include:

Nov. 7, “International Flavors: Greece,” a six-hour demonstration and hands-on class that includes a series of traditional dishes. Tuition for the full program is 245 Canadian dollars (or $231, at 1.06 Canadian dollars to the U.S. dollar), or 50 Canadian dollars for the demonstration only.

Nov. 25 to 27, “Pâtisseries de Noël,” on Christmas pastries. Each day includes a three-hour demonstration, followed by a hands-on session (595 Canadian dollars).

Dec. 2, a three-hour demonstration on gourmet pizza (50 Canadian dollars).

Dec. 7 and 8, a two-evening workshop on tapas (445 Canadian dollars).

A full list is available on the school’s Web site.