Forget fare wars, since ticket prices are rising.

To avoid the usual fees, frequent fliers on United can pay a $249 annual fee to check up to two bags on each flight.

Now there are fee wars.

And travelers are losing out in this battle, as airlines introduce new surcharges, on top of the checked-bag fees and fuel surcharges that became the norm in the last year.

United, American, Delta, Continental and US Airways recently introduced $10 surcharges on flights during the most popular travel days around Thanksgiving and New Year’s, as well as travel next year during Easter and spring breaks.

Last summer, several airlines added a surcharge of $5 a bag for travelers checking them at the airport, instead of prepaying online. United passengers can also pay a $249 annual fee to check up to two bags on each flight, and avoid paying the usual fees.

British Airways is now charging passengers up to $90 to select seats more than 24 hours before their flight. The cost of sending a child alone on a flight costs more, too, as some airlines have bumped up unaccompanied minor fees to as much as $100 each way.

For travelers, all the fees make it tougher to figure out the real cost of a trip, and even raise the prospect, under the right (or wrong) circumstances, of paying more in fees than the base fare.

For the loss-plagued airline industry, the fees are an easy way to raise revenue without appearing to raise ticket prices.

Glen W. Hauenstein, executive vice president for network planning and revenue management at Delta Air Lines, said that fare wars in the past forced airlines to charge far too little for tickets, especially compared with what travelers spend on hotel rooms, meals and taxis once they get to their destination.

“Fees have become an easy way for us to try and fix the fares,” he said.

But Richard Branson, the chairman of Virgin Atlantic, warned that airlines risked alienating travelers by adding so many charges on top of ticket prices.

“The extra fees are not a good idea,” Mr. Branson said in an e-mail message.

He said he favored stating the total cost of travel upfront in the air fare, and urged regulators to enforce the idea. The Transportation Department says it has “no authority to regulate the prices that airlines charge for air transportation services,” including these various fees, although it requires airlines to clearly state its baggage charges on Web sites and in ads.

The practice has created two new classes of travelers — those who pay fees, and those who do not. The latter group includes elite frequent fliers, who are often exempt from the fees, along with travelers in first class.

That leaves occasional travelers like families taking vacations or flying home during the holidays bearing the greatest burden.

The fees are helping the airlines, but only a bit, as the recession is cutting deeply into consumers’ and businesses’ trips.

Operating revenue for the major United States carriers dropped 20 percent in the first half of 2009, compared with 2008, with the airlines taking in about $18 billion less this year. Over that same period, airlines collected $3.8 billion in fees.

Rick Seaney, the chief executive of FareCompare.com, an airfare shopping site, said he expected fee wars to continue.

“There is a breaking point,” he said. “But I’m not positive the airlines have reached it yet.”