The Boeing Company said Tuesday that its new long-range airplane, the 787, would not make its first test flight this year because of delays caused by a machinists’ strike.
Skip to next paragraph
Enlarge This Image
Boeing, via Associated Press

A Boeing 787 Dreamliner is tested at a plant in Everett, Wash. A problem occurred on the four test versions of the plane at the plant, as well as parts that are still at Boeing’s suppliers.

The setback is the latest in the development of the plane, nicknamed the Dreamliner, which is Boeing’s first major new aircraft in more than a decade. Boeing has 903 orders for the 787, whose first customer is All Nippon Airlines of Japan.

The Dreamliner, which will include innovations like a lightweight composite air frame and engines that are more fuel-efficient, was originally scheduled to be completed this year.

But Boeing has pushed back the 787’s introduction date several times because of production delays, and deliveries are now scheduled to begin in the third quarter of next year.

A Boeing spokeswoman, Yvonne Leach, declined to say whether the decision to put off the test flight would further delay the delivery of the Dreamliner.

She also would not say when the plane would make its first flight, which had been set to take place before the end of 2008.

Ms. Leach blamed the delay on a 58-day strike by members of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace workers, which ended when the third shift of workers at Boeing’s plants returned to their jobs Sunday night.

Some 27,000 Boeing workers in Washington State, Oregon and Kansas walked off the job on Sept. 6 in a dispute over job security. They voted on Saturday to end the strike after a deal was reached last week on a new contract.

The walkout halted production of airplanes at Boeing and interrupted development work on the Dreamliner.

Last month, Boeing executives told analysts that the company would need time to get its factories up to speed after the strike concluded.

At that time, Boeing’s chief executive, W. James McNerney Jr., estimated there would be at least a “day for day impact” on Boeing’s production schedules. Given that estimate, the Dreamliner’s first test flight could take place early next year.

Ms. Leach said, however, that Boeing was in the middle of an assessment of how long it would need to return to full production. She said Boeing was also mapping out a new schedule for the Dreamliner, including the new date of its first flight and when it might be shipped to customers.

Those dates “will be part of the assessment, because there are so many factors involved,” Ms. Leach said.

Several analysts have predicted the Dreamliner would not be delivered to customers until 2010.

Meanwhile, Ms. Leach said Boeing had discovered that fasteners used throughout the Dreamliner had been incorrectly installed, and was taking steps to reinstall them properly.

The problem occurred on the four test versions of the Dreamliner that have been assembled at Boeing’s factory in Everett, Wash., as well as on parts of the plane that are still at Boeing’s suppliers, Ms. Leach said.