It now seems like such a brilliant idea that it is a surprise no one had thought of it before: pairing figure skaters with hockey players for ice dancing routines in the ultimate ice rink reality show.

Christine Hough-Sweeney and the former N.H.L. enforcer Tie Domi were eliminated last week from “Battle of the Blades.”

If it happens on ice and it involves hitting and scoring, The Times Slap Shot blog is on it.

Go to the Slapshot Blog »
Frank Gunn/Canadian Press, via Associated Press

Claude Lemieux and Shae-Lynn Bourne are among the final three couples competing in the CBC's “Battle of the Blades.”

That’s what the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation has done this fall with “Battle of the Blades,” a huge hit across Canada that has captured a following in United States border towns like Detroit, whose cable systems show CBC programs.

“It’s really great that these two sports that have had to share hockey rinks across Canada can finally get along,” the program’s co-host, the former Olympic skater Kurt Browning, said on the opening telecast.

The premiere of “Blades” on Oct. 4 drew 1.95 million Canadian viewers, the second-highest figure for an original Canadian show, according to The Hollywood Reporter. It is averaging about 1.5 million viewers a week.

Each pair is composed of a former N.H.L. player and a Canadian figure skating star, including Olympic, world and national champions.

Every week, the pairs learn a new dance routine, performed in front of an audience at the old Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto, brought back to life for the program. The routines are judged by a panel using the old 6-point scoring system. The overall winning pair receives $100,000 for a favorite charity.

Three pairs now survive from the original eight: Craig Simpson and Jamie Salé, Claude Lemieux and Shae-Lynn Bourne, and Marie-France Dubreuil and Stéphane Richer. They will compete Sunday.

Simpson and Salé have the highest fan vote totals, according to the “Blades” Web site. Salé won Olympic gold with pairs partner David Pelletier, now her husband. Pelletier is a coach on the program.

“None of us have ever really had that moment where it’s just you,” said Simpson, who played with Pittsburgh, Edmonton and Buffalo. “You don’t have your stick in your hand, and you can’t hit anybody.”

The regular judges are Dick Button, a two-time Olympic champion who is a longtime skating commentator, and Sandra Bezic, a renowned skating choreographer and former pairs skater. There is also a rotating group of guest judges.

Last week, the guest judges were the Olympic gold medalist Kristi Yamaguchi and her husband, Bret Hedican, a former N.H.L. player who competed against many of the “Blades” participants.

Once the judges’ scores are in, viewers vote by telephone, text message or on the Web.

Pairs who do not survive are “iced” and appear Tuesday night on “The Hour,” a late-night program hosted by George Stroumboulopoulos, Canada’s version of Jimmy Kimmel, who served as a guest judge.

The show’s co-hosts are Browning and Ron MacLean, who is part of the “Hockey Night in Canada” broadcasting team.

Those who did not know MacLean was once a hockey referee were startled on the first night to see him barrel down the ice and come to a fast stop in front of the cameras.

Since then, MacLean and Browning have also gotten in on the action, appearing last week as members of the Blues Brothers, replete with fedoras and sunglasses.

Button, who like the other judges is overwhelmingly positive in his criticism, said he had been surprised by the outcome. “Whether on hockey skates or figure skates, or what they’re on, it’s been a joy to see,” he said last week.

But no matter the enthusiasm, the skating is a far cry from the artistry shown by Olympic and professional figure skaters. There is no getting past the fact that hockey players are trained to be fast and aggressive, rather than lithe and creative, and that many are better known for being fighters than the lovers they are asked to portray.

Much joshing took place at the beginning of “Blades” — for instance, about a potential brawl between two longtime rivals, Tie Domi and Bob Probert, known for mixing it up during their careers.

These N.H.L. veterans seem particularly bent on lifts, death spirals and hurling about the female skaters, rather than triple axels or camel spins. But there have been surprising bursts when the hockey players’ skating was on a par with the pros’.

On Nov. 2, Simpson and Salé earned straight 5.9s from the judges for a lively routine set to the bossa nova from “Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery.”

“You could take that performance on the road, it was so entertaining,” Yamaguchi told them.

The women wear conventional skating costumes — skimpy and spangly — but the men, for the most part, have been spared the Spandex and satin pants, although Domi made his final appearance in a short-sleeved pink shirt.

In contrast to his reputation, Domi appeared to choke up while making farewell remarks after he and his partner, the Canadian national champion Christine Hough-Sweeney, were iced Nov. 2.

He emotionally thanked his castmates and the makeup crew, hair stylists and wardrobe ladies before MacLean gently cut him off.

The evening before, Yamaguchi seemed to sum up Domi’s experience, saying, “I never thought I’d ever say you looked cute on the ice.”