The Boeing Company confirmed on Thursday that it would delay deliveries of its new jet, the 787, until the first quarter of 2010.

Boeing said the first flight of the jet, the Dreamliner, would take place in the second quarter of 2009. It had hoped the plane would fly before the end of this year, and expected to make its first deliveries in late 2009.

Boeing originally planned to deliver the first 787s in May 2008. Boeing shares fell $1.41, or 3.4 percent, to $40.27.

Boeing attributed the delay to a strike earlier this fall by the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers and also said it had encountered problems with fasteners used on early production airplanes.

“Our industry team has made progress with structural testing, systems hardware qualification and production, but we must adjust our schedule for these two unexpected disruptions,” said Scott Carson, the president of Boeing Commercial Airplanes.

Senior airline executives said last week, however, that there were other problems with the Dreamliner, Boeing’s first all-new jet in more than a decade.

The executives, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak for Boeing, said that the plane was over the weight at which Boeing hoped to fly it and that there were other issues with the plane’s unique structure, which features a fuselage made primarily from composite materials rather than aluminum.

The 787, a wide-bodied, long-range aircraft, is expected to be 20 percent more fuel efficient than other planes used on long trips.

Boeing, which has worked on the plane since the late 1990s, announced its first order for the 787 in 2004, from All Nippon Airways. Since then, it has received nearly 900 orders from many of the world’s biggest airlines, making it the most popular new plane in the company’s history.

American customers for the Dreamliner include Delta Air Lines, which inherited orders placed by Northwest Airlines when the two companies merged this year, as well as Continental Airlines and American Airlines.

Boeing said it was still evaluating the effect that the delays would have on its customers’ orders and would provide the airlines and other buyers with updated schedules once a review was complete. It also said it was determining any financial effect from the schedule change.