British Airways and Iberia of Spain agreed on Thursday to a $7 billion merger, ending 16 months of negotiations and creating one of the world’s largest airlines to compete with rivals like Air France-KLM and Lufthansa.

Under the proposal, British Airways would own 55 percent of the combined company and Iberia would hold the rest, the two companies said in a joint statement Thursday.

Willie Walsh, chief executive of British Airways, would retain that position at the top of the combined group while Antonio Vázquez, Iberia’s chief executive, would become chairman.

“It makes sense,” said Gert Zonneveld, an analyst at Panmure Gordon in London.

“Both airlines have their issues and there are some decent cost savings and synergies to achieve.”

Iberia said in a statement that the merger, which still requires shareholder and regulatory approval, was expected to be completed in the first quarter of next year.

A sharp drop in passenger numbers during the recession has forced airlines to consider linking up with competitors through acquisitions or alliances to share profits and employees, coordinate their route systems and even pool resources to buy airplanes.

Lufthansa bought the 20 percent of British Midland Airways it did not own in October. Delta recently pushed to expand its partnership with Air France-KLM.

The combination of British Airways and Iberia would create a company with about $22 billion in revenue and result in annual cost savings of about nearly $600 million, the airlines said.

The new airline group would fly to 205 destinations with 419 aircraft and would retain their individual brands.

The combined company would be incorporated in Spain for tax purposes with the majority of board and shareholder meetings taking place in Madrid. The operating and financial headquarters of the new group would be in London, they said.

British Airways and Iberia said in July 2008 that they were in talks about a merger. Discussions reached a deadlock when the two airlines failed to agree how to solve the British carrier’s $4.4 billion pension fund deficit. In the meantime, the economic downturn continued to hurt passenger numbers, forcing airlines across the world to cut prices and the number of flights.

The combination would benefit by linking Iberia’s network in Latin America with the top position by British Airways on trans-Atlantic routes and its hub at London Heathrow, the world’s second-busiest airport by passenger numbers after Atlanta.

“The merger will create a strong European airline well able to compete in the 21st century,” Mr. Walsh said in the statement. “Both airlines will retain their brands and heritage while achieving significant synergies as a combined force.”

British Airways had a £208 million loss in the six months through the end of September. Revenue fell 14 percent, to £4.1 billion.

British Airways shareholders will receive one share of the new company for every British Airways share held and Iberia shareholders will receive 1.0205 new shares for every Iberia share held.

The two airlines are awaiting a ruling by the Department of Transportation on a proposed alliance with American Airlines on trans-Atlantic routes.

Shares of British Airways rose 7.5 percent in London on Thursday.

Iberia shares rose 12 percent in Madrid.