NOT long after the teenage con man played by Leonardo DiCaprio decides to pose as a Pan Am co-pilot in Steven Spielberg's ''Catch Me If You Can,'' he shows up at a T.W.A. counter at Kennedy Airport hoping to catch a ride out of town.

The ticket agent looks up at him and chirps, ''Are you my dead head?'' Mr. DiCaprio, as Frank Abagnale Jr., is taken aback and has no idea what she means. But watching the movie, I laughed out loud. In the airline world, a dead head is not a fan of the Grateful Dead, but an airline crew member traveling to his or her next assignment.

''Catch Me If You Can'' recalls the glamour that attended that world in the early 60's, and, more important, gets the details right. I can vouch for that, not only because I write about the airline industry, but also because I was an airline child.

My father, Frank H. Maynard, joined American Airlines in 1947, after serving in the Army Air Corps in North Africa during World War II. For the next 25 years, until his death, our family enjoyed all the perks that accrued to airline life during its glory years.

As the movie indicates, it was indeed a big deal back then to travel by plane. The average family generally took their trips by car. ''It was the era of the joy of flying. Not, 'Oh, drat, I have to go to the bloody airport,' '' said Jeannine Oppewall, the movie's production designer.

Airline passengers wore their finest daytime attire: suits and ties for men, suits or dresses for women. ''It was a much more formal time,'' said Mary Zophres, costume designer for the film. ''You didn't leave your house for the grocery store without being dressed up.''

Dressing up was required for airline personnel and their families traveling non-rev -- short for non-revenue, or on a free pass -- especially if they were flying up front, industry jargon for first class. Even employees who were used to the privilege had a sense of adventure about it.

I have vivid memories of my dad, clad in a gray flannel suit, crisp white shirt and tie, standing near the cockpit, chatting with pilots in their navy blue uniforms. Meanwhile, friendly stewardesses, who knew my father from the Detroit airport, where his office was located, would kneel by our seats to welcome us personally on board.

My mother, Bernice G. Maynard, always wore gloves with her suits, while my brother, Frank J. Maynard, and I had probably the most elegant wardrobes of any Midwestern children at the time. He donned blazers and carried his own briefcase, while I had sets of matching coats and dresses from Best & Company, along with a blue leather suitcase that my father had brought home from the airport, where left luggage was sold to employees if passengers never claimed their bags.

This was a world in which martinis (and for us, milk) came in individual glass decanters, where napkins had buttonholes so they would attach to shirt fronts, and where roast beef was wheeled down the aisle, to be carved seat-side. (Thanks to the free passes that continued for my family for a time after my father's death, I never flew coach until I was 17, and then on Air France to Paris, which somehow made it tolerable.)

There was nothing more exciting for a child passenger than to be presented with a pair of souvenir pilot's wings; in the movie, Mr. DiCaprio's phony flight officer awards wings to a couple of youngsters, admonishing them, ''Always do good in school.'' Pilots of the day radiated authority and intrigue, as the movie charmingly depicts when autograph seekers surround them as if they were movie stars.

In the movie, passers-by ogle Mr. DiCaprio's Abagnale as he strides down a New York street dressed in the double-breasted Pan Am pilot's uniform and cap with a white crown, attire chosen because the airline's first pilots were naval officers, said Ms. Zophres.

Mr. DiCaprio's character sensibly tries to impersonate a co-pilot, not a captain, or he would have been instantly caught out as a fraud. Captains were the dukes of the airline world, in firm charge of their airships, and able to issue commands within airports that were instantly obeyed as well.

A friend of mine once watched in awe as his father, an American Airlines captain, once strode over to a gate agent in Dallas to ask quietly that a spilled soft drink in the terminal's aisle be swept up. The agent immediately snapped to attention. ''Right away, sir!'' she replied, impressing my friend for life with his father's power.

Working for Pan Am carried even more prestige because it was an international carrier, winging its way to destinations around the world. For me, perhaps the most striking scene in the movie has Abagnale surrounded by a bevy of eight ebullient young women in stewardess uniforms who believe they've been selected from among dozens vying for airline jobs.

It's no surprise they're so excited. ''It was something you aspired to and a great way to meet a mate,'' said Ms. Zophres. One of my dad's duties was to fly to Chicago periodically to attend the job interviews for American's stewardess academy, where the hopeful applicants paraded in front of company managers as if beauty contestants down a runway.

Pan Am's stewardesses were usually college educated and bilingual. They got to wear those distinctive blue-gray uniforms, as elegant as anything Givenchy ever designed for Audrey Hepburn. The vivid turquoise color of the uniforms in the movie is much brighter than the real Pan Am outfits, but that was intentional, said Ms. Zophres, who was allowed to borrow a vintage uniform from a Miami museum for 24 hours in order to make a copy.

Just as the dressy uniforms depicted in the movie evolved into the more casual outfits worn by airline personnel today, airports, with their heavy security and vast concourses, have changed as well. To capture the look of the earlier era, the movie's crew activated abandoned terminals at the Ontario, Calif., airport, which stands in for Miami's, as well as the old T.W.A. terminal at JFK, a double-domed structure designed by Eero Saarinen. Known among airport workers as ''the flying brassiere,'' the terminal is now closed, its future in limbo.

Miami is the setting for one of the closest calls for Mr. DiCaprio's character during a notable scene toward the end of ''Catch Me.'' Tom Hanks, playing an F.B.I. agent chasing Abagnale, who has been kiting checks across the country, swoops down on a man outside the faux Miami airport, thinking he has caught his prey. He has not. Mr. DiCaprio's character, the great impersonator, has paid someone to impersonate him.

As Mr. Hanks realizes he has been foiled, a British Airways DC-3 jet, gleaming silver in the sunlight, lifts off into the brilliant blue sky, carrying Mr. DiCaprio away. The vintage aircraft, rented from a company in Los Angeles that keeps a stable of old planes for use by moviemakers, is yet another reminder of an era now long gone.