July, August and September are normally the strongest months for the airlines, with planes filled with vacationers willing to pay as much as necessary to get to their destinations. Not this year.

On Wednesday, American Airlines’ parent, AMR, said it lost $359 million, or $1.26 a share, in the third quarter, when revenue fell 20.2 percent from the period in 2008. That was in contrast with a $31 million profit last year, or 12 cents a share.

Meanwhile, Continental Airlines said it lost $18 million, or 14 cents a share, compared with a loss of $230 million, or $2.09 a share a year ago.

Shares of AMR fell 91 cents to $6.75, while Continental shares fell $2.19, to $13.73.

Results for both were better after one-time charges. Continental said it would have earned $2 million if not for a $20 million charge to reflect severance plans. American said it would have lost $94 million less without charges for aircraft sales.

Airlines are grappling with a weak economy that has cut into business travel and prompted everyone, whether leisure or corporate traveler, to hunt for bargains. The companies have cut flights and routes, grounded airplanes and instituted a variety of fees the past year. But they have not been able to offset the impact of a 20 percent drop in passenger revenue across the industry.

In a letter to employees, American’s chief, Gerard J. Arpey, said the airline was finding it difficult to fill planes at fares that would allow it to be profitable. “We’ve reduced supply, but the demand for air travel — and business travel in particular — has fallen even more,” he said.

At Continental, executives said they expected relatively strong passenger demand over the holiday period but deeply discounted fares in between.

Business travel, a crucial component for Continental, showed few signs of a significant comeback. “There is a big deficit in business travel,” Jeffrey A. Smisek, the airline’s chief executive, said during a conference call with industry analysts. “Your high-yield business travelers are either not traveling, or they’re traveling in the back of the bus” meaning on coach rather than business-class fares.

Asked by Helane Becker, an airline analyst, whether Continental expected business travel to return to strong levels of earlier this decade, Mr. Smisek replied, “We fully recognize that there may be a new normal that is better than what we see today, but not as good as we saw in the past.”

On Tuesday, United Airlines’ parent, UAL, said it lost $57 million, or 39 cents a share. United and Continental recently formed a marketing partnership that will receive a lift next week when Continental joins the Star Alliance, a group of airlines that includes United.

In a bright spot, AirTran Airways, a low-fare airline, said Wednesday that it earned $10.4 million in the third quarter, or 8 cents a share, compared with a $94.6 million loss last year, or 81 cents a share. It was the airline’s third consecutive quarterly profit.

Meanwhile, Southwest Airlines said it would begin service next May to a new airport that is under construction near Panama City, Fla., in the Panhandle. The airline’s chief executive, Gary C. Kelly, said the airline planned eight daily flights, two a day from four cities, and would begin selling tickets in December. 