
Only two weeks ago, Roger Penske looked on from trackside as his team won the Indianapolis 500 car race. Now he has laid claim to what he hopes will be another trophy: Saturn.

General Motors announced Friday that it had agreed to sell Saturn to the Penske Automotive Group, whose chairman is Mr. Penske, 72, who is one of the nation’s biggest automobile dealers.

The move rescues Saturn and its dealers from the uncertain future they have faced since February, when G.M. announced plans to shut Saturn by 2012 if no buyer could be found. G.M. subsequently said it would discontinue Saturn by the end of this year.

The sale is the latest step by G.M., which sought bankruptcy protection on Monday, to sell off assets as it reorganizes itself.

G.M. decided it no longer wanted to run Saturn. But the brand, created in 1990 as a way to attract owners of Toyotas and Hondas, had attracted 16 potential bidders, G.M. said this week.

The price of the deal was not disclosed.

The acquisition of Saturn by Penske Automotive is “like finally finding your puppy a good home,” said Jack R. Nerad, executive editorial director of Kelley Blue Book, which analyzes the values of new and used cars.

Mr. Penske is best known for his Penske Racing operations, including teams that compete in the IndyCar, Nascar and Grand-Am series. Mr. Penske, who competed as a driver in the 1950s and 1960s, is a constant presence at auto tracks.

He will initially buy Saturn cars from G.M., under the terms. But he is expected to eventually buy cars from other carmakers.

Along with the Saturn brand, Penske Automotive is acquiring the Saturn parts inventory and the right to sell vehicles through the Saturn dealership network.

“We have agreed upon a framework that we believe will build momentum for the Saturn brand,” Mr. Penske said in a statement. “Saturn has a passionate customer base and outstanding dealer network. For nearly 20 years, Saturn has focused on treating the customer right. We share that philosophy, and we want to build on those strengths.”

G.M. said Mr. Penske’s move would preserve 13,000 jobs at Saturn and its dealerships. The company has 350 showrooms, virtually all built to sell only Saturn vehicles.

The move will more than double the dealership holdings of Mr. Penske’s company, which owns 310 franchises around the world. It is the country’s second-biggest dealership group in terms of sales behind AutoNation. It is also the sole distributor of Smart line of small cars from Daimler.

Shares of Penske Automotive Group rose 5 cents, to $14.65.

G.M. is seeking to use bankruptcy to pare itself down to a core group of brands, including Chevrolet and Cadillac, and closing or selling others.

G.M. announced months ago that it was seeking to divest itself of Saturn, a 25-year-old subsidiary that initially focused on fuel-efficient cars to rival those of foreign carmakers. Saturn cost G.M. about $5 billion in the late 1980s, including a new factory in Spring Hill, Tenn., and development costs for its small cars.

G.M. promoted Saturn as a “Different Kind of Company, a Different Kind of Car” and boasted of the cooperative management arrangement in Spring Hill.

Saturn workers were covered by a separate agreement between the Saturn Corporation and the United Automobile Workers union, whose members came from other G.M. factories.

But the unit’s sales peaked in 1994 at 286,000, and both G.M. and the U.A.W. soured on its management style. The U.A.W. proposed a spinoff of Saturn in the late 1990s, but G.M.’s board refused to consider the move.

Saturn workers eventually abandoned their separate contract, and the Spring Hill plant no longer builds Saturn models. Saturns are now built in other plants, including one in Wilmington, Del., and in Europe.

On Monday, G.M. said the Spring Hill plant would compete with two other G.M. plants, in Janesville, Wis., and Orion Township, Mich., for the right to build a new small car. In the meantime, G.M. has suspended production at the Spring Hill plant.
