Southwest Airlines said Thursday it posted a loss for the fourth quarter but earned money in 2008 for the 36th straight year.

Southwest executives said the airline, which expanded at a rapid pace throughout this decade, expected to slow its growth over the next few years. It is trying to find buyers for some of its older aircraft and is reducing its airplane orders as it cuts capital spending.

On Wednesday, American and United, the nation’s second- and third-largest airlines, said that their losses widened in the fourth quarter even though prices for jet fuel pulled back from record levels.

Southwest said that it lost $56 million in the fourth quarter, including special items, in contrast to a $111 million profit in 2007. It was the second consecutive quarter in which Southwest posted a loss including special charges.

Without the one-time charges, the airline earned $61 million, compared with $87 million in the 2007 quarter. Southwest said it would make profit-sharing payments to its employees, because the figure is based on its earnings aside from the special charges.

Sales in the quarter rose to $2.7 billion, from $2.5 billion.

Shares of Southwest, which is based in Dallas, rose $1.43, or 17 percent, Thursday, to $9.81. The fourth-quarter performance, aside from special items, was better than analysts had expected.

Full-year profit fell to $178 million, from $645 million in 2007. Southwest’s profit without special items was $294 million, compared with $471 million for all of 2007. It was the airline’s 36th consecutive profitable year.

Southwest has been one of the industry’s leading purchasers of fuel hedging contracts, which lock in the price of fuel. When prices rise, the contracts protect against losses. But when prices fall, as they have since midsummer, companies must take charges to reflect the difference between the price they locked in and the actual price of fuel.

The chief executive of Southwest, Gary C. Kelly, said the airline’s growth was “suspended indefinitely.” Instead, he told industry analysts that Southwest would focus on reducing costs and improving its profit margins.

“We still want to grow. That’s a desire,” Mr. Kelly said, but he said it was of secondary importance in the current economic climate.

Southwest said it planned to take deliveries on 13 new planes this year, but would eliminate 15 older aircraft, leaving it with 535 planes at year’s end.

The airline also said it had reduced its aircraft deliveries for 2010 to 10 planes, instead of the 22 orders it had placed with the Boeing Company. Southwest has reduced its capital spending for 2009 by about $700 million and expects to cut the same amount in 2010.

Still, Southwest’s cuts are modest compared with those at other airlines like United, which is retiring 100 planes through the end of 2009. And Mr. Kelly said Southwest did not plan job reductions, although other airlines have announced that they are cutting thousands of jobs as they trim their fleets.

“We’ve never had any layoffs in our history, and we will do our best to avoid them,” he said. Southwest offered voluntary retirement programs to its employees in 2004, however.