Southwest Airlines has long been the envy of the industry for its foresight in arranging contracts to lock in jet fuel prices. But its strategy may have backfired now that oil prices have dropped.

Southwest Airlines said Thursday that it lost $120 million in the third quarter, its first quarterly loss in more than 17 years, because of a noncash charge to write down the declining value of its hedging contracts.

The airline took a one-time charge of $247 million, reflecting the decline in oil prices, which hit record high levels in July. The last time Southwest lost money was in the first quarter of 1991.

Without the charge, Southwest said it would have earned $69 million. It had record operating revenue of $2.9 billion, up 11.7 percent.

“It’s like you can’t win,” said Betsy J. Snyder, an industry analyst with Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services. “People bother you when you don’t hedge, and when you do, and prices go down, you get hit.”

Another airline, Continental, said Thursday that it had posted a third-quarter net loss of $145 million, not including extraordinary items. Continental earned $241 million in the period a year ago.

On Wednesday, Delta Air Lines reported a net loss of $26 million for the quarter, while American Airlines lost $360 million.

The losses at the four big airlines underscored the difficulty of the carriers this summer in maneuvering through record oil prices. The price of oil peaked at about $145 a barrel in July, and fell below $70 a barrel Thursday. That news lifted airline stocks. Southwest rose 93 cents, to $12.49, while shares of Continental rose 22.6 percent, to $15.75.

After prices spiked this summer, many airlines cut flights and routes, grounded aircraft and imposed fees for features that used to be included in the price of a ticket, like checking bags, booking trips with frequent flier miles and even beverages.

Executives hoped the steps, coupled with higher ticket prices, would improve results in the fourth quarter and next year. But they now are facing the uncertain economy, which could keep travelers off planes. “Economic downturns are going to create less travel, that’s true whether domestically or internationally,” Lawrence W. Kellner, the chief executive of Continental, said in a conference call Thursday. “This looks to be a global downturn, not just one in the United States.”

Gary C. Kelly, the chief executive at Southwest, added that his airline was concerned about the volatility of fuel prices.

“I don’t think anybody really knows where fuel prices are going in the next three months,” Mr. Kelly told analysts. “All I have to do is look back at the last three months and the three months before as evidence of that.”

Throughout the decade, Southwest has aggressively purchased contracts to guarantee the price of fuel. It has contracts covering part of its fuel purchases through 2012, and has begun buying contracts for 2013.

In past quarters, Southwest has booked millions of dollars in gains because it paid far below market price for fuel. The practice seemed especially prescient earlier this year, when fuel prices nearly doubled compared with 2007.

At the end of the second quarter, Southwest’s contracts, which stretch through 2010, were worth $6 billion. But at the end of the third quarter, the value of the contracts had dropped to about $2.5 billion, and have since fallen to $1.1 billion, Southwest executives said Thursday.

The contracts’ value reflected the drop in the price of oil. But under federal accounting rules, Southwest must exclude about 10 percent of its future contracts, and value them at current prices.

When fuel prices are rising, the practice can be beneficial. Indeed, Southwest booked a $511 million gain in the second quarter because of favorable swings in its contracts. But when prices drop, a company is required to take a charge reflecting the decline.

Southwest said it still had hedging contracts in place for 85 percent of the fuel it planned to purchase in the fourth quarter; 75 percent of its 2009 fuel; and 50 percent of the fuel it planned to buy for 2010.

Mr. Kelly said he was not discouraged by the loss. “Over all, declining fuel prices are a very good thing for an airline including Southwest Airlines,” he said in an interview.

Southwest did not anticipate, Mr. Kelly said, that any future swings in oil prices to be as significant as in the second quarter. But analysts are still concerned about the industry’s outlook.

Last week, Standard & Poor’s cut its rating on Southwest from A minus to BBB plus, still the best among the carriers. Mr. Kelly said he was pleased with the airline’s overall performance, and said he expected it could maneuver through the economic crisis.

“The world is on fire, and we’re in pretty good shape,” Mr. Kelly said. “We’re going to fight hard to blast through the headlines.” 