Generations of business leaders around the world were schooled in the principles of management devised in the 1920s by General Motors’ president, Alfred P. Sloan Jr.

Fritz Henderson watched President Obama issuing a statement on Monday before his own news conference in New York.

Now General Motors has to learn how to manage itself through bankruptcy and into a future as a much smaller company — something that Mr. Sloan, whose strategy emphasized size, might never have foreseen.

The outcome will determine whether Fritz Henderson, G.M.’s chief executive, keeps his job, and whether the Obama administration correctly bet $50 billion on the future of G.M. Mr. Henderson invoked Mr. Sloan, author of “My Years With General Motors,” on Monday as he stood before reporters and cameras in the offices of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, the law firm that is directing G.M. through bankruptcy, and is a tenant in the G.M. building on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.

As he passed a portrait of Mr. Sloan that morning, Mr. Henderson said, he was reminded that Mr. Sloan led G.M. through a financial crisis in the early 1920s that threatened the company’s existence.

“If he were sitting here today, he would say, ‘Just do your job,’ ” Mr. Henderson said. But Mr. Sloan had years to turn around G.M. and decades to hone the reputation that made his 1963 memoir a best seller.

Mr. Henderson, a relative unknown in corporate America, has only a few months, and he will do so under enormous scrutiny, from a new board and from the Treasury, which has become a majority owner of the new G.M.

His news conference on Monday was, in a sense, his introduction to the country after being thrust into G.M.’s top job, after the Obama administration fired his predecessor, Rick Wagoner, on March 29. in Detroit, Mr. Henderson, 50, joined the automaker a quarter-century ago, after earning a degree in business administration at the University of Michigan, where he was a pitcher on the varsity baseball team. He also has an M.B.A. from Harvard.

He toiled in a variety of financial assignments until 1997, when he was put in charge of G.M.’s Brazilian operations, traditionally a proving ground for the company’s most promising executives.

From Brazil, Mr. Henderson moved on to run G.M.’s operations for all of Latin America, then its emerging Asia-Pacific business, and finally one of the company’s biggest prizes, G.M. Europe. He was working there in late 2005 when G.M., facing a financial crisis, abruptly announced the departure of its chief financial officer, John M. Devine, and installed Mr. Henderson.

His salary as chief executive is $1.3 million. In 2008, a regulatory filing showed he had stock grants and deferred compensation worth $6.6 million at the time it was given, plus the option to buy an additional one million shares.

But the value of his stock had plummeted by the end of 2008, and it has now been wiped out in bankruptcy court.

Unlike other G.M. chief executives, he will have to contend with a variety of bosses. The Treasury has hired a search firm to find directors, particularly focusing on those with backgrounds in the auto industry and in corporate restructurings. G.M.’s interim chairman, Kent Kresa, the former chief executive of Northrop Grumman, is expected to receive that job full time.

Along with a new board and the government, Mr. Henderson will have to work alongside Albert A. Koch, vice chairman of AlixPartners, the turnaround and financial advisory firm that advised the government in drafting the restructuring plan.

In Detroit, Mr. Koch is best known for serving as chief financial officer at Kmart during its own bankruptcy case from 2002 to 2003.

The two men will divide the remaking of the company. While Mr. Henderson focuses on G.M.’s future shape, Mr. Koch’s job will be to dispose of the assets that G.M. does not want to keep, which make up what the company is calling Old G.M.

They will be working together “step by step” to assure an orderly winding down of the old company, Mr. Henderson said.

Mr. Henderson said the government’s involvement did not faze him. “We’re fine with that. I’m fine with that,” he said.

Seated in the front row at the news conference on Monday was Harvey R. Miller, who leads G.M.’s legal team, and Ira M. Millstein, the veteran lawyer at Weil, Gotshal who advised G.M. directors in 1992, when they staged a boardroom coup that led to the ouster of the chief executive, Robert C. Stempel.

Speaking after the news conference, Mr. Millstein said Mr. Henderson would face an unusual challenge in juggling the demands of so many bosses, including a new board; the governments of the United States and Canada, which together will hold 72.5 percent of the company; and the United Automobile Workers.

“What does a board do when it’s a government-owned company?” Mr. Millstein said. “That’s a new book.”

Mr. Henderson said that he did not believe that the government would second-guess the company on ordinary product and strategy decisions — like the cars G.M. might develop — but would limit its involvement to major governance issues. He did not elaborate.

Most chief executives are given at least a year by their boards, and often much longer, to bring off a restructuring, said Michael Useem, professor of management at the Wharton School.

Mr. Henderson may have only three months, the government’s ideal length for the bankruptcy case. “He’s obviously on a very short leash,” Professor Useem said.

Mr. Henderson seemed keenly aware of his limited window on Monday. “There are no second chances, but we won’t need one,” he said. “It is our job to deliver.”