 How jittery are investors about airline stocks these days? Just ask United.

An erroneous headline that flashed across trading screens Monday, saying United had filed for a second bankruptcy, sent the airline's stock plummeting.

United Airlines shares fell to about $3 from more than $12 in less than an hour before trading was halted, wiping more than $1 billion in value. Its shares closed at $10.92, down 11.2 percent.

By the end of the day, fingers were pointing in many directions to assign blame.

United blamed an old Chicago Tribune article that, it said, was posted on the Web site of The South Florida Sun-Sentinel newspaper. That article was picked up by a research firm, Income Securities Advisors, which then posted a link to it on a page on Bloomberg News, which sent a news alert based on the old article.

But the newspaper's editor and the Tribune Company, which owns The Sun-Sentinel, denied that the paper had run the article on its Web site, saying it could be found only in its archives.

The episode was a reminder of how negative news, rumors and even outdated articles can travel at lightning speed, with some investors selling before pausing to check facts.

''That's how much confidence people have in our system, when you can take the stock of a major corporation to zero in about 10 minutes,'' said R. Thomas Buffenbarger, president of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, which represents mechanics and other employees at the nation's airlines.

Added Philip A. Baggaley, an airline industry analyst with Standard & Poor's Ratings Services: ''Given that there's been so much bad news in the past half year, it means that investors are very nervous about the airlines.''

They are nervous about other industries, too. Only two months ago, shares of General Motors plunged to their lowest point since 1954 when Merrill Lynch issued a forecast saying that a bankruptcy was ''not impossible'' -- something G.M. denied was in store.

United operated under bankruptcy protection from 2002 to 2006, and it has struggled this year in the face of record prices for jet fuel, announcing plans to ground planes, like big Boeing 747s, eliminate flights and cut 7,000 jobs.

That gave the report of another bankruptcy filing some credence, even though United has taken none of the preliminary moves for such a drastic step, like warning regulators of its financial distress or lining up a restructuring company for advice.

The morning events sent BlackBerrys buzzing from United's headquarters in Chicago, to Capitol Hill, to the floor of the machinists' union convention in Orlando, where Mr. Buffenbarger heard the news shortly before Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton was to speak to the group.

Richard Lehmann, founder of Income Securities Advisors, said a reporter for his firm had discovered a link to the old Chicago Tribune article during a routine search on Google for information about bankruptcy filings in 2008.

The article, with a fresh date, was posted on The Sun-Sentinel Web site, next to a radar map tracking the location of Hurricane Ike, Mr. Lehmann said.

The reporter included a link to the article in a summary of bankruptcy items posted to the Income Securities' page on Bloomberg, which sent out a news headline referring to the article.

That headline alerted United officials to the old article. After millions of shares quickly traded hands, they asked the Nasdaq to stop trading in United stock. The market ordered a halt at 11:08 a.m. Eastern time. By the end of the day, more than 54 million shares traded hands, far higher than normal.

After receiving phone calls about the item, Mr. Lehmann said he checked other news sources and realized the mistake. Income Securities removed the item from its summary on Bloomberg, and issued a correction, as did Bloomberg.

Trading in United shares resumed at 12:30 p.m. 

A spokeswoman for The Sun-Sentinel did not return calls seeking comment. But the Tribune Company, in a statement, said, ''To be clear, no story appeared today or over the weekend on The Sun-Sentinel Web site or any Tribune Web site regarding United Airlines' filing for bankruptcy.''

Earlier Monday, Earl Maucker, the executive editor of The Sun-Sentinel told a news industry Web site that his paper was not responsible, saying, ''We never posted the story. We never did anything.''

Jean Medina, a United spokeswoman, said the airline had asked the newspaper for a retraction, and that the company's lawyers would decide whether to start legal proceedings.

''This was a very serious event that impacted our stock, and caused trading to be halted,'' she said. ''This is what happens when people are irresponsible and don't check facts.''

Despite its recent problems, analysts said another bankruptcy filing did not appear to be imminent for the airline, especially since it had taken steps recently to raise cash.

''The reaction to this seems out of proportion,'' Mr. Baggaley said. ''If they were to run into trouble, you wouldn't think it would be now.'' 