The scintillating ending to the Big 12 championship game almost certainly clinched a spot for No. 3 Texas in the Bowl Championship Series title game on Jan. 7 against No. 2 Alabama in Pasadena, Calif.

But because the Longhorns needed two critical penalties to set up a field goal as time expired in their 13-12 victory over Nebraska, one big question is certain to be asked: could Texas Christian or Cincinnati leap past the Longhorns in the B.C.S. formula?

We won’t find out until about 8 p.m. on Sunday. But the short answer is no.

“There is no reason to think otherwise,” the independent B.C.S. analyst Jerry Palm said.

The Longhorns’ brand-name power will probably be too difficult to overcome for teams like T.C.U. and Cincinnati, which lack the Longhorns’ pedigree.

Five teams are undefeated in the Football Bowl Subdivision, but Alabama (13-0) and Texas (13-0) seem almost certain to play for the title. Strong arguments can be made for T.C.U. (12-0), Cincinnati (12-0) and even Boise State (13-0). Those three teams can claim they have better wins than Texas does.

But there is little chance that one of those teams will slip past the Longhorns. Palm said that voters simply were not conditioned to do that. Human votes account for two-thirds of the B.C.S. formula.

“I’m not sure I would vote Texas No. 2, but most people will,” Palm said.

The biggest arguments against the Longhorns are that they won the title in a down year in the Big 12 and did not schedule a competitive out-of-conference game.

The other teams’ résumés are more impressive. T.C.U. blew out ranked Brigham Young and Utah teams and also won at Clemson.

Boise State beat No. 7 Oregon in its opener and demolished the rest of its competition. Cincinnati beat Oregon State and Pittsburgh on the road, two solid victories.

“I think we’ll be ranked No. 2 going to Pasadena,” Texas Coach Mack Brown said. “That’s what should happen.”

That’s up for debate, but it looks as if the Longhorns’ status and high ranking all season will carry them to the Rose Bowl. 