A college football season that spent most of autumn in the doldrums of predictability awoke with a rousing salvo the past two weeks. A riveting performance by Alabama in the Southeastern Conference championship game and furious comebacks by Texas and Cincinnati provided an exclamation point.

But through good and bad stretches in college football, contentious feelings about the Bowl Championship Series have held strong. And this year will be no different. Alabama and Texas will play for the national title on Jan. 7, a strong matchup of tradition-rich programs.

But after Texas sputtered all game against Nebraska on Saturday and needed an official to put time back on the clock in order to secure a win, the question that will haunt this bowl season is whether Texas Christian, Cincinnati and Boise State were given a fair shot to make the title game.

“It’s a shame that you can’t settle it on the field,” T.C.U. Athletic Director Chris Del Conte said in a telephone interview. “We settled our portion on the field.”

Perhaps the biggest reason Texas will be lined up across from Alabama is not because the Longhorns are better than Cincinnati, Boise State or T.C.U. It is because of Vince Young, Ricky Williams and Earl Campbell; brand names are rewarded for their history in modern college football.

The Longhorns began the season No. 2 in the country largely because of the return of the dynamic quarterback Colt McCoy. But a down year in the Big 12 and Texas’ weak nonconference schedule led to the three other undefeated teams having at least one stronger victory.

While Texas’ best win came against No. 20 Nebraska, Cincinnati had victories at No. 16 Oregon State and at No. 17 Pittsburgh. T.C.U. torched No. 15 Brigham Young and No. 23 Utah and should get credit for scheduling games at Clemson and Virginia.

Boise State beat No. 7 Oregon, meaning that three other undefeated teams can claim better wins than Texas.

The problem is in the preseason polls: Cincinnati began the year unranked, Boise State was No. 14 and T.C.U. was No. 17.

“I certainly think you could make a case that Cincinnati should be playing Alabama for the national championship,” said Nick Carparelli Jr., the Big East associate commissioner for football. “The way that the system works, Alabama and Texas were at the top of the polls from Day 1. The patterns in which voters vote make it virtually impossible to get ahead of either of those two teams in the polls.”

Texas’ final chance to make an impression on voters, who make up two-thirds of the B.C.S., was a dud. In a 13-12 victory over Nebraska, McCoy threw three interceptions and the Longhorns looked lost on offense, needing a last-second field goal to win.

Cincinnati of the Big East would have most likely ended up in the title game if Nebraska beat Texas; the Bearcats finished No. 3 in the final poll.

And T.C.U. and Boise, two teams outside the B.C.S. conferences, will not be able to prove themselves against a blue-blood team, as they will play each other.

“Is this team worthy of playing in the national championship game?” T.C.U.’s Del Conte said. “No doubt about it. Do we have the very best coach? No doubt about it.”

There is no chance for a college football playoff anytime soon. The next B.C.S. television contract runs through the 2013 regular season. That means any significant change could not occur until the end of the 2014 season.

College presidents are the road blocks to any type of evolution of college football’s system. Their opinions are so strong against any playoff model that the conference commissioners, who essentially work for the presidents, voted to not even talk about any significant changes when the notion was raised in May 2008.

While college football’s regular season remains wildly popular, the bowl games will be intriguing because, outside of the title game, they are not set up to rate well on television. Boise and T.C.U. played in the Poinsettia Bowl last year, and it ranked 15th in ratings among bowl games at 3.7. Non-B.C.S. teams traditionally rate poorly. (Even the epic Fiesta Bowl between Boise and Oklahoma in 2007 was a television dud.)

The Orange Bowl between Iowa and Georgia Tech, two middling teams with moderate followings, is also expected to be a ratings bust.

But low ratings and strong disapproval from fans toward the B.C.S. appears to mean little to the conference commissioners. The bowls all make plenty of money for their leagues off the current deal, and no one would seemingly want to cede the power that would involve any change.

“We do feel like it’s working,” said Bill Hancock, the executive director of the B.C.S. “College football is thriving, and we feel like the B.C.S. has played some part in that.”

So instead, college football’s awkward system for determining a national champion sputters on. (Four prank callers even managed to hack into the B.C.S. conference call Sunday night.)

A sometimes dull year had a predictable ending — controversy about who will play in the national title game and bitterness toward a system that rewards history as much as current events. 