There are essentially 66 programs in the Bowl Championship Series, which allows them to be among the big-money players in college football. Sixty-five of those teams are in the six so-called power conferences. The other is Notre Dame, a football independent with a role in the B.C.S. contract as a nod to its history, allure and ability to move the ratings dial and fill seats at bowl games.

With Notre Dame Coach Charlie Weis almost waving the white flag on his tenure on Sunday, the lone team without a conference in the B.C.S. may soon distinguish itself in another way.

If Notre Dame fires Weis, it will enter the 2010 season having gone through five coaches in 10 years. Notre Dame is the only B.C.S. program to churn through that many coaches in the past decade, a distinction that speaks to its hiring decisions as much as to the job itself. (The list of five includes the brief tenure of George O’Leary, who was dismissed soon after the university discovered he had embellished his résumé.)

With another change on the horizon, two questions will inevitably arise: Just how good is this job? And who is the right person to wake up the Notre Dame program?

Weis met with reporters here Sunday and came full circle on the bravado he showed when he was hired five years ago. Back then, when Weis initially met with his new players, he told them they were a 6-5 football team and that simply was not going to cut it.

After Notre Dame’s double-overtime loss Saturday to a middling Connecticut team (5-5), Weis finds himself with a 6-5 record and a tough trip to Stanford on Saturday. He said he would not resign but seemed resigned to his fate.

“If they decide to make a change, I’d have to say that I’d have a tough time arguing with that,” Weis said.

Over all, Weis is 35-26, owner of a lower winning percentage than his two predecessors, Bob Davie and Tyrone Willingham, both dismissed. The difference will be how much Weis is paid to leave, a figure that has been reported around $18 million.

Even with all of his New Jersey sarcasm over the years, Weis has remained nothing but a blunt realist during his time at Notre Dame. That was true again Sunday, when he agreed with an adage often used by his mentor, Bill Parcells: You are what your record says you are.

“My intent is to be here,” Weis said. “But if that were the rationale, it would be tough for me to argue with that point.”

So who would come to Notre Dame? It will be the most asked question in college football until the Irish hold an introductory news conference.

The best guess would be Cincinnati Coach Brian Kelly, and other names will include Stanford Coach Jim Harbaugh, Oklahoma Coach Bob Stoops, Iowa Coach Kirk Ferentz and Temple Coach Al Golden.

Kelly’s background and innovative work in making the Bearcats a national power indicate that he has the on-field and off-field chops for the job.

(Kelly’s teams are known for high-flying offenses, but most of his experience is actually in defense, something sorely needed at Notre Dame. It ranks No. 80 in total defense in N.C.A.A. statistics.)

Kelly, an Irish Catholic, is one win from leading Cincinnati to back-to-back B.C.S. games, but he also has the hand-shaking and baby-kissing ability necessary for a job like the one at Notre Dame. Part of that comes from Kelly’s political background, which includes helping run Gary Hart’s presidential campaign in Massachusetts soon after Kelly graduated from Assumption College.

The Irish’s best angle for luring Kelly may be that they will be the choice destination in this college football off-season. Barring anything unforeseen, none of the other premier jobs are expected to open this fall. (Especially with Michigan’s athletic director, Bill Martin, saying Sunday that Rich Rodriguez would return as coach.)

Although the Notre Dame job may not be the same prize it was a decade ago, Weis showed that a coach can still win at Notre Dame. He did that in part by leading the Irish to two B.C.S. games, in the 2005 and 2006 seasons.

But his lasting positive legacy may be that he showed that the Irish can still be a competitive national power in recruiting. For all of Weis’s losses, his ability to attract top-flight high school players like Sam Young (Florida), Jimmy Clausen (California), Dayne Crist (California), Michael Floyd (Minnesota), Golden Tate (Tennessee) and Manti Te’o (Hawaii) to South Bend shows that Notre Dame can still recruit at an elite level. That had become a looming question during the Davie and Willingham tenures.

A peek at the schedule for next season shows why this job may be more attractive than it was. The Irish only play three true road games in 2010, at Michigan State, Boston College and Southern California. Notre Dame has seven home games and two at neutral sites, stacking the deck in favor of a bounce-back season.

Weis has taken the program back to a level where it is competitive. The schedule can keep it there for a while.

It is up to the new Notre Dame athletic director, Jack Swarbrick, to decide on the coach who can attempt to lead the Irish’s return to glory.

But as the Weis era appears to be drawing to a close, the program is not as lost as its recent history may make it appear. 