This was to be the season of three marquee quarterbacks battling it out for the Heisman Trophy.

Oklahoma’s Sam Bradford won the award last season, with Colt McCoy of Texas finishing a close second. Florida’s Tim Tebow was third, after becoming the first sophomore to win the prize in 2007.

But after a wild weekend, it is possible that only one of them will be among the finalists at the award ceremony Saturday night in the most chaotic Heisman Trophy race in recent years.

Bradford’s Heisman hopes were dashed by injury early this season, and Tebow’s were crushed Saturday in Florida’s 32-13 loss to Alabama in the Southeastern Conference championship game.

McCoy threw three interceptions in Texas’ woeful last-second 13-12 win against Nebraska in the Big 12 championship game Saturday, but he may still be favored ahead of Alabama tailback Mark Ingram and Stanford tailback Toby Gerhart to win the trophy.

“It’ll be real interesting,” Houston Coach Kevin Sumlin said in a telephone interview. “For the first time in a long time, I don’t think you can sit here today and say, Well it’s down to this guy or even these two guys.”

The 925 voters are required to submit their ballots online by 5 p.m. Monday. The field of finalists is to be announced Monday night.

Chris Huston, the creator of the Web site HeismanPundit.com, projects that when the votes are tallied, McCoy will be the winner, followed by Ingram, Gerhart, Tebow and Clemson tailback C. J. Spiller. Nebraska defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh could also crack the top five, which would make him the highest finisher by a defensive lineman since Washington’s Steve Emtman was fourth in 1991.

Huston said he expected Gerhart to win among voters from the West, Ingram to capture the South, and McCoy to claim the Southwest. That leaves three regions up for grabs, including the Northeast, which does not have a serious candidate. Huston said that McCoy’s name recognition would help him with those voters and with the casual voters.

“I think that McCoy is going to have enough gas left in the tank,” Huston said in a telephone interview.

Huston said he expected the race to be historically close in terms of the number of strong candidates. It could be the most tangled race since 1989, when Houston quarterback Andre Ware edged Indiana tailback Anthony Thompson by 70 points, with West Virginia quarterback Major Harris and Notre Dame quarterback Tony Rice each receiving more than 500 points.

“It’s pretty muddled,” Huston said.

But as soon as the championship games ended Saturday night, the politicking to clear up the Heisman race began. After his team’s victory, Texas Coach Mack Brown spun McCoy’s play on his final two fourth-quarter drives — one that ended with an interception and the other that set up Hunter Lawrence’s 46-yard field goal on the game’s final play — as his “Heisman moment.”

McCoy threw for 3,512 yards and 27 touchdowns, with 12 interceptions, for the second-ranked Longhorns (13-0), who will play No. 1 Alabama in the Bowl Championship Series title game. But last season, he had more yards and touchdowns, and fewer interceptions.

“As far as I’m concerned, he’s the Heisman winner,” the Texas offensive coordinator Greg Davis said.

Ingram is seeking to become the first Heisman winner in Alabama’s storied history. He has rushed for 1,542 yards and 15 touchdowns, and he overcame a hip pointer to finish with 189 total yards and 3 touchdowns in his team’s romp over Florida.

Gerhart was the only Heisman contender who did not play Saturday. He closed his regular season Nov. 28 with 205 rushing yards and 3 touchdowns in Stanford’s win against Notre Dame. Gerhart leads the Football Bowl Subdivision in rushing yards (1,736) and touchdowns (26).

The wide-open nature of the race is evidenced by the ballot of Pat Forde, a senior writer for ESPN.com. He said he intended to vote Suh first, followed by Gerhart and Boise State quarterback Kellen Moore.

“I’m not voting with any great conviction on this in any direction,” Forde, a Heisman voter since the early 1990s, said. “I feel like I could be talked out of it and in to somebody else, or out of somebody else 10 times before I send this thing in.”