As dusk gave way to darkness here Saturday night, Athletic Director Jack Swarbrick sang the alma mater on the field at Notre Dame Stadium in the aftermath of the Fighting Irish’s double-overtime loss to UConn.

As he locked arms and scanned the crowd, Swarbrick saw someone in the stands wearing a T-shirt that said, “Sack Jack.” For Swarbrick, it was as good a sign as any that after nearly 18 months on the job, he had grown into his role.

“I said, I’ve made it. I’ve arrived,” he recalled with a chuckle in his office on Monday.

Swarbrick is expected to fire Notre Dame Coach Charlie Weis soon after the Fighting Irish play Stanford on Saturday. Even Weis himself has said that he could not argue with the decision.

And as an inevitable search for a new coach becomes the biggest story in college sports this season, it will put the low-key Swarbrick in a high-glare spotlight. A graduate of Notre Dame and Stanford Law School, Swarbrick’s background as a lawyer is not considered a traditional one for an athletic director. His appointment at Notre Dame was the first on-campus job of his career.

Swarbrick’s experience has helped transform Indianapolis into a hub of amateur sports, helping to lure the N.C.A.A. headquarters, numerous international events and the 2012 Super Bowl there. Swarbrick, 55, was also a finalist for the N.C.A.A president’s job that Myles Brand got in 2002.

Those who have worked alongside Swarbrick, who was a partner at the Indianapolis law firm of Baker & Daniels, use words like “visionary,” “genius” and “consensus builder.”

“I believe he’s the most amazing person that I’ve ever met,” said Allison Melangton, the president and chief executive of the 2012 Indianapolis Super Bowl Host Committee.

Max Siegel, the chair of the sports and entertainment group at Baker & Daniels, added, “He has the skill set and expertise and, quite frankly, the experience that separates him from most people who have athletic director jobs.”

As the pressure and attention has mounted, Swarbrick said he is doing what he enjoys, leading a group of people toward a common cause: building a winning football program.

“As I approach this decision and how to make it, professionally it’s what I like doing,” he said. “It may be a perverse element of my personality.”

Swarbrick said that Notre Dame’s competing for national titles and Bowl Championship Series berths is important for both college football and college sports. He said he hoped to honor his friend Brand, who died of cancer earlier this year, by showing that a football program can be at the top of the N.C.A.A.’s Graduation Success Rate, in which Notre Dame finished tied for first this year, and also compete for the national title.

“The day I conclude that’s not possible is the day that I leave this job,” Swarbrick said. “Because that’s why I’m in this job. Proving that thesis is what excites me, because the opposite for me is too painful to contemplate. That means that the American scholastic sport model is dead. And I won’t accept that.”

Swarbrick’s direct nature was evident soon after he began interviewing for the Notre Dame job. One of his first questions was how much authority he would be granted in making significant decisions, much like the one he is facing.

The athletic director at Notre Dame has long been portrayed as a puppet for boosters and trustees, a notion that hit a crescendo when the former coach Tyrone Willingham was fired essentially against the wishes of the former athletic director Kevin White. Then, in a process that can kindly be termed clumsy, Notre Dame interviewed numerous candidates before settling on Weis in December 2004.

“I’m not sure what played out with Charlie was purely Kevin’s call,” said Big Ten Commissioner Jim Delany, a longtime friend and admirer of Swarbrick. “It seems like the decision here has been clearly identified for Jack, one way or the other.”

Swarbrick said that having the autonomy over major decisions such as the future of Weis was paramount to him accepting the job. When asked Monday if he felt he had complete authority over Weis’s future and the potential hiring of the next coach, he did not hesitate.

“Every meaningful decision that involves athletics involves two people, it’s Father John and I,” he said of Notre Dame’s president, the Rev. John I. Jenkins. “And I have been absolutely insulated from any form of external pressures. That’s what I asked for when I was hired, and that’s exactly the way that it’s been.”

Weis said that his relationship with Swarbrick could be characterized as “fair and cordial,” and he keenly noted that Swarbrick’s role was indicative of the evolution of the athletic director position.

“First of all, he’s a Notre Dame guy, which is always a good start, because he understands the place,” said Weis, who will fly home with the team after Saturday’s game and not stay on the West Coast to recruit. “And I think that with a law background, it’s a nice complement for how the A.D. position has evolved. The A.D. used to be just about organizing games and things, and now its contracts and negotiations and the B.C.S.”

Swarbrick said that Weis’s recruiting success at Notre Dame came at a time when the program’s ability to recruit was criticized.

He also gushed about Weis personally: “I haven’t worked with a lot of people in my career who I like more than Charlie Weis.”

Swarbrick has made subtle but significant changes around campus. He has decentralized the authority in the athletic department so that every team has a sport administrator with whom to report. Instead of many teams’ coaches reporting to a single associate athletic director, for example, the men’s tennis team now reports to the director of football media relations.

Swarbrick’s biggest imprint on football to this point has been reconnecting Notre Dame with its past by scheduling neutral-site games, including at Yankee Stadium.

He said he considered Notre Dame’s place in the Bowl Championship Series “status quo” as the B.C.S. enters a new four-year television contract, and he said that Notre Dame still strongly valued its football independence.

“The issue isn’t whether we want to remain independent, the issue is whether external forces over time make it where it just becomes untenable,” he said. “I hope that never happens. If it does, my job is to make sure we’re prepared for it, positioned for it and can deal with it.”

Swarbrick claims to be a boring guy, admitting that he is an “iced tea addict,” enjoys Harlan Coben novels and considers the first of the 25 or so Bruce Springsteen shows he saw “a three-and-a-half-hour religious experience.” He is a father of four, and has been essentially living apart from his wife and their two youngest children, who are attending high school in Indianapolis.

Swarbrick is unassuming and self-deprecating, as he laughs his way through a story of the embarrassment of eight bars of Van Morrison’s “Saint Dominic’s Preview” playing before the Cuban national anthem after the Cubans won gold in an Olympic volleyball qualifying tournament he was running.

There will certainly be a soundtrack of news media noise surrounding Swarbrick in the next few weeks, as he tries to make the decision that will help Notre Dame compete for national titles. After two seasons of observing the Irish, Swarbrick said that the facilities, its broadcast partner and ability to recruit make competing at the highest level a realistic goal.

“I have no question that we can compete for the national championship and should on a regular basis,” he said. “If there were some endemic limitation where I said, Gosh, given this we can’t get there, I’d identify it. But I don’t see it. We can compete.”