With Texas looking shaky in giving up 39 points to Texas A&M on Thursday night and Alabama looking mortal in a come-from-behind victory at Auburn on Friday, two thirds of college football’s so-called Big Three were threatened in a 24-hour span.

But those uninspired performances will do little to change this most predictable of college football seasons. Nothing short of a stunning upset — a Florida State victory over No. 1 Florida on Saturday or a Nebraska win over Texas in the Big 12 title game next weekend — will allow an outsider to crash the Bowl Championship Series title game.

This season is a microcosm of the B.C.S.: teams like T.C.U., Cincinnati and Boise State, who aren’t traditional powers, have little chance to compete for the national title.

It has been apparent since the middle of October that the winner of next Saturday’s Southeastern Conference title game between No. 1 Florida and No. 2 Alabama will play No. 3 Texas in the B.C.S. title game on Jan. 7 in Pasadena, Calif.

Any chance of, say, T.C.U.’s entering the top two was about as realistic as the strait-laced Alabama coach Nick Saban doing a headstand on the sideline at the Georgia Dome next weekend.

“Voters have a hard time wrapping their minds around an undefeated T.C.U. team being better than an undefeated Texas team,” said Jerry Palm, an independent B.C.S. analyst.

Simple perceptions are hard to overcome in college football’s clunky structure to match up the No. 1 and No. 2 teams. And while fourth-ranked T.C.U. has a higher-ranked defense than Texas (No. 6 vs. No. 7) and arguably a comparable signature victory (the Horned Frogs won at Clemson, the Longhorns at Oklahoma State), it has nowhere to go but down in the B.C.S. standings.

Consider this: Palm said he would expect a one-loss SEC champion to end up in the title game before T.C.U., Cincinnati or Boise State — undefeated teams with lesser brand names.

Not only will T.C.U. not impress the poll voters enough to overtake Texas, it also lacks the statistics and results to impress the computers. The reality for T.C.U. in the title race is that it has already peaked.

“T.C.U. is done doing anything to impress voters,” Palm said. “If anything, they’re going to go back and not forward without teams ahead of them losing.”

The Horned Frogs (11-0) play New Mexico (1-10) on Saturday, when even a blowout victory will drop them in the computer rankings. Since few people will see the game, it would be hard to expect voters in other polls to change their opinion drastically.

T.C.U. isn’t just fighting its schedule; it’s fighting the mystique of Vince Young, Earl Campbell and Darrell Royal.

No. 5 Cincinnati, which defeated Illinois, 49-36, on Friday on national television, will probably leap over the Horned Frogs by the final B.C.S. poll. Cincinnati plays No. 9 Pittsburgh next weekend. A win in that game would probably vault the Bearcats past T.C.U. thanks to both human perception and the computers. (If a team is trying to impress voters, it’s wise to play on the season’s final weekend. Michigan learned that the hard way in 2006.)

Cincinnati is lucky that it plays in the Big East, which has an automatic bid to the B.C.S.

If Oklahoma State beats Oklahoma on Saturday, burnishing its B.C.S. credentials, the biggest loser this season could be Boise State. The Fiesta Bowl has indicated it will take the Cowboys over the Broncos in its game, a nod to the bowl’s longtime partnership with the Big 12.

No. 6 Boise State has a signature victory and a solid B.C.S. pedigree, having won perhaps the greatest bowl game of the B.C.S. era: a stunning victory against Oklahoma in the Fiesta Bowl after the 2006 season.

But the Broncos have little chance at one of the top two spots; their last chance to compete against a bowl-eligible team came late Friday against Nevada. A 44-33 victory over Nevada (8-4) was almost certainly not going to change their B.C.S. prospects.

Barring an upset, the two conferences that ruled college football in 2008 — the SEC and the Big 12 — are destined for return appearances in the national championship game.

“From what we’ve been told, if we take care of our business and we win out, then we’ll have a shot at the big game,” the Texas offensive coordinator Greg Davis said.

And fair or not, T.C.U. and Boise State do not appear to have a shot.

The B.C.S. leadership has hired an executive director and a high-profile public relations firm in the past few weeks to try to revamp its image.

But a sport that in the past decade has thrived on unpredictability has become easier to read than “Goodnight Moon.”

And despite recent rule changes to help include the so-called outsiders, the dominant theme of the B.C.S. since its creation has been that of big conferences excluding the little guy in order to hoard the abundant money tied to its games.

Unless something drastic happens this season, the B.C.S.’s reputation for exclusion will only grow larger. 