The one theme of this college football season has been its predictability. Just take a peek at next week’s feeble slate of games. There are no games between top-25 teams in the Associated Press poll, something virtually unheard of this late in the season. The top three teams in the country — No. 1 Florida, No. 2 Alabama and No. 3 Texas — play Florida International, Chattanooga and woefully underachieving Kansas. That means three teams that are 30-0 will beat up on three teams that are 14-16.

But there are other issues percolating in the sport.

NOTRE DAME The Charlie Weis era appears to be fading into the sunset in South Bend. The Irish have lost back-to-back games to Navy and Pittsburgh, falling to 6-4, and they host plucky Connecticut and travel to No. 14 Stanford to complete the season. In his fifth year, Weis has a 35-25 record, in the same neighborhood as his predecessors Bob Davie and Tyrone Willingham.

The Irish’s new athletic director, Jack Swarbrick, told reporters over the weekend that the six years remaining on Weis’s gigantic contract would not influence his job status. There have been multiple and varied reports of just how much a buyout of Weis’s contract would be. (The Sporting News reported $18 million on Sunday.) To be safe, just say it is an excessive amount of money, especially in this economy.

The top candidate to replace Weis would probably be Cincinnati Coach Brian Kelly. He has won at every level of college football and has the No. 5 Bearcats, with a revamped defense and a revolving door at quarterback, on the cusp of their second consecutive Bowl Championship Series berth.

Perhaps more important, he is everything that Weis is not — charismatic, comfortable shaking hands and a proven winner in the college game.

BAD YEAR FOR THE B.C.S. The matchups for the B.C.S. bowl games remain unclear. A projected blockbuster national title game between the Southeastern Conference winner (Florida/Alabama) and Texas is expected, but the rest of the games look unattractive, especially for television.

Jerry Palm, an independent B.C.S. analyst and the publisher of collegebcs.com, said that one of the few certainties about the B.C.S games would be low ratings. None of these teams in the hunt for a B.C.S. game are likely to inflate ratings: Texas Christian, Boise State, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Oklahoma State and Georgia Tech.

There is a good chance four of those teams will end up in B.C.S. games, and American viewers will probably respond by watching something else.

Palm said that seven of the eight lowest-rated games in B.C.S. history involved teams from conferences outside the series or the Big East champion. Though T.C.U. seems assured of a slot, Boise State is emerging as more of a possibility. A lot will depend on No. 12 Oklahoma State, which if it beats Colorado and Oklahoma is probably headed to the Fiesta Bowl, taking away a berth from a higher-ranked team.

Either way, a collective yawn awaits.

“When you guarantee teams like T.C.U. a spot in this thing, and I don’t care how good they are, people don’t want to watch,” Palm said. “They want to watch the names that they’re familiar with.”

WEIRD YEAR FOR THE HEISMAN The Heisman Trophy race appears to be coming down to Dec. 5, with the better player in the Florida-Alabama game between the Gators’ Tim Tebow and the Crimson Tide’s Mark Ingram likely to win it.

“I never seen one this wide open,” Southern Methodist Coach June Jones said. “I can’t ever remember one this wide open. It’s anybody’s game right now.”

This may not be fair to Texas’ Colt McCoy, Stanford’s Toby Gerhart, Clemson’s C. J. Spiller, Boise’s Kellen Moore or Houston’s Case Keenum. But the reality is that it is hard to have faith in the Heisman’s antiquated and flawed selection process, which has nearly 1,000 voters.

Familiarity is still key, so Tebow may win as more of a career appreciation than an indicator of him being the sport’s most outstanding player this season.

FALL OF THE ELITE Along with Notre Dame, two other traditional powers — Southern California and Michigan — are in downward spirals. Michigan’s is much worse, but even with the inevitable whipping the Wolverines will receive against Ohio State this weekend, it is hard to imagine their replacing Rich Rodriguez after two years. The biggest factor here is with Bill Martin, the lame-duck athletic director. It would seemingly be difficult for Martin to fire Rodriguez and leave his successor as athletic director with a coach he did not hire, along with the financial fallout that would come with paying Rodriguez.

As for U.S.C., the Trojans’ blowout loss to Stanford shows that there’s a new pecking order in the Pacific-10. It will be interesting to see how Coach Pete Carroll deals with his defense’s shortcomings after the season. After all, he runs the defense. Will he bring in coaching help?

TELEVISION NOWHERE It is a shame that the Mountain West’s television package limits its teams’ visibility. There appears to be no way to see the ratings from college football’s marquee game over the weekend between T.C.U. and Utah because, according to The Dallas Morning News, CBS College Sports does not subscribe to Nielsen, which produces ratings.

And in an era when perception is so important, T.C.U.’s reality is that it is nearly invisible to mainstream viewers. 