Like fishing stories told on front porches at dusk or tall tales traded around bar stools after last call, the legend of Tim Tebow seems likely to only grow larger in this part of the country.

As the years pass and the tales are spun and re-spun, Tebow’s accomplishments will take on an almost mystical quality. The Florida faithful — a record 90,907 of them — flocked here on Saturday for a flesh-and-blood sendoff that felt part like a graduation, part like a funeral. They left with more tall tales to tell.

While Tebow will play in the Southeastern Conference title game and a Bowl Championship Series game for the top-ranked Gators, his performance at The Swamp in a 37-10 victory over Florida State provided one final grace note in the greatest career in Florida history.

Tebow finished the day with three touchdowns passing and two rushing, and his final play here will resonate as a fitting finish. As the Gators faced third-and-goal at the 1-yard line, the obvious play call echoed through the stands: “Tebow, Tebow, Tebow.”

With cameras flashing like fireworks all over The Swamp, Tebow scored on an option keeper, pointed to the sky and left the field to deafening cheers.

“I’ve never seen anything like it, not only here, but in all of college sports,” Florida Coach Urban Meyer said. He added: “I hope we get to see that again. I really do. I hope it’s here.”

Tebow’s searing sendoff stood in stark contrast to the downtrodden Seminoles sideline, as Florida State (6-6) lost its sixth straight to the Gators. This loss could mark the end of Bobby Bowden’s 34-year tenure at Florida State.

“I want to coach next year,” said Bowden, who admitted this would be his last time coaching in The Swamp. “Now let me say, I need to go home and do some soul searching.”

If this is the end of Bowden’s tenure, Tebow and Meyer will surely have big parts in the story of his downfall.

“It’s like playing against 12 people,” Bowden said of Tebow.

With a deft passing touch and his typical lumberjack’s mentality, Tebow bolstered his case for the Heisman Trophy in this season’s wide-open race. He completed 17 of 21 passes for 221 yards, threw no interceptions and ran for 90 yards.

But Saturday’s victory represented more than one day’s work, capping an undefeated regular season for the Gators and one of the most remarkable careers in college football. Tebow holds 24 Florida records, 13 Southeastern Conference records and four N.C.A.A. marks. His pinball-like totals helped him stiff-arm past Steve Spurrier, Emmitt Smith and Danny Wuerffel in Gator lore.

All those lines in the record books cannot replace the indelible snapshots that popped up around The Swamp on Saturday. Fans lined up 15 deep before kickoff, arriving hours early for a place in line just to touch Tebow as he entered the stadium. Fans shinnied up trees for a glance at Tebow, hopped up on flipped-over trash cans or climbed atop fences for one final look as he strolled into the stadium wearing a gray suit.

“Everything was in slow motion today,” Tebow said. “Everything from our breakfast to our walk-through, which was good, because you want to remember everything.”

Thousands of fans wore eye black as a tribute, as the Bible passages scrawled below Tebow’s eyes have become a trademark. He seemed to respond with a message to the fans, as the verse inscribed on his eye black — Hebrews 12:1-2 — read, in part, “We are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses.”

The clamor that arose during Tebow’s walk into the game seemed almost mute compared with the tributes that followed. The stadium practically shook when he left the tunnel to bear-hug Meyer as the final of the 25 Gator seniors who were recognized on Saturday.

Tebow had tears in his eyes as he ran to meet Meyer, which set off tears throughout the stadium.

“What affected all of us was when we saw the tears in his eyes when he came out of the tunnel,” said Pam Tebow, Tim’s mother. “We were fine until we saw that. It even affected the other families and players.”

Tebow did a victory lap to shake fans’ hands around the stadium after the game, then returned about an hour after it ended to greet the remaining fans. Some cried. Others shrieked. Aside from a late fumble, Tebow’s only real miscue of the day came when he accidentally knocked over a cheerleader on the first victory lap.

“I felt really bad,” Tebow said, adding that he picked her up and hugged her.

With a 22-game winning streak, Florida heads to the SEC title game against No. 2 Alabama, entering what Meyer termed “potentially the biggest week we’ve ever had here.”

It will be a game in which Tebow can try to secure an even greater legacy, one he said he hopes revolves around people remembering “how much I cared.”

After an emotional final home game, the lasting memory may be how much that feeling was reciprocated.