Notre Dame Athletic Director Jack Swarbrick is a devout fan of the mystery writer Harlan Coben, whose hallmarks are clever plot twists and surprise endings.

When the college football world descends on New York City this week for its annual postseason black-tie hobnobbing, there will be a lobby full of speculation at the Waldorf Astoria about how the mystery surrounding the next Notre Dame football coach will play out.

But more than a week into Notre Dame’s search, Brian Kelly, the Cincinnati coach, appears to be the leading candidate. He will interview for the job in New York on Tuesday.

After dozens of interviews with agents, administrators, Notre Dame officials and coaches around college football, conversation after conversation has ended with the question, “If not Kelly, who else?”

The reality for Swarbrick may be that if Notre Dame cannot find a new coach in New York this week, he will not find one anywhere.

The potential Notre Dame coaching field has dwindled drastically. And with a decision expected this week, it would take a Coben-esque twist for the search to end with anyone but Kelly.

While it is not definite that Notre Dame will hire Kelly, he is the only remaining home run hire on the board. He bolstered his candidacy Saturday when Cincinnati rallied from a 31-10 deficit for a scintillating 45-44 victory at Pittsburgh to clinch back-to-back berths in Bowl Championship Series games for the Bearcats.

Whoever takes over at Notre Dame will not be able to rely on quarterback Jimmy Clausen and receiver Golden Tate, the most valuable players of the current 6-6 team. They said Monday they would bypass their senior seasons to enter the N.F.L. draft.

Kelly probably was not the top candidate on Notre Dame’s wish list when the process began, but as more than a week has passed since the firing of Charlie Weis, he has emerged at the front of the line. Kelly has said he is open to the job, he fits Notre Dame’s Irish Catholic archetype and he would be able to compete for the national title game much easier at Notre Dame than at Cincinnati.

A Cincinnati spokesman said that the Bearcats were negotiating a new contract with Kelly. But Kelly has not hid his interest in Notre Dame. On Monday he wrote on Twitter: “Just informed our team that Notre Dame has contacted me and I will listen to what they have to say.” (His Twitter followers jumped to near 3,500 from around 1,800 in about four hours.)

Kelly has moved to the front of the line because high-profile candidates have publicly removed themselves from the running — Oklahoma’s Bob Stoops, Florida’s Urban Meyer, Iowa’s Kirk Ferentz and Northwestern’s Pat Fitzgerald, to name a few.

Swarbrick has said he wants a proven winner at the college level, which essentially eliminates any of the dark horse N.F.L. candidates like Jon Gruden and Tony Dungy.

Stanford Athletic Director Bob Bowlsby said Monday he was “100 percent confident” that his coach, Jim Harbaugh, was not a candidate. He said there was “absolutely no chance” of Harbaugh’s being the next coach at Notre Dame, as he has been speaking with Swarbrick, his close friend, throughout the process to give him advice.

If Kelly says no or Notre Dame does not want him, the pickings appear slim. The New York Post reported Randy Edsall, the Connecticut coach, as an emerging candidate. A Connecticut official said it was the university’s policy not to speak about other programs’ coaching searches.

Edsall has done a great job of building the UConn program from scratch, but his résumé pales compared with Kelly’s. In the past two years in the Big East, Kelly has gone 13-1 while Edsall has gone 6-8.

Swarbrick has done a good job keeping this search relatively stealthy. After all, who can forget the image of television cameras chasing Kevin White, his predecessor at Notre Dame, around Salt Lake City in his failed attempt to hire Meyer?

Swarbrick has enlisted the help of a search firm to keep things quiet and has handled the search well. Ultimately, though, searches are judged on wins and losses years later, not how they are handled during them. (Look at Alabama’s awkward courtship of Nick Saban after the 2006 season. Don’t hear anyone complaining about that now.)

The final thought here is that if Kelly doesn’t get the job, the main reason would be that it would be too obvious. Rarely in college coaching searches is the obvious candidate hired. (Five years ago, Meyer was the obvious candidate at Notre Dame and Steve Spurrier at Florida.)

But for now, all signs, contacts and logic point to Kelly. We should know by the end of the week if he is indeed the next Irish coach, or if Swarbrick channels Coben and comes up with a surprise ending.