Florida defensive end Carlos Dunlap, the most valuable defensive player in last season’s Bowl Championship Series title game, was arrested and charged with driving under the influence early Tuesday and will not play for the No. 1 Gators on Saturday in the Southeastern Conference championship game against No. 2 Alabama.

Coach Urban Meyer announced the suspension of Dunlap on Tuesday. Dunlap, a junior, was charged with driving under the influence after being found asleep in the driver’s seat of his car in Gainesville, Fla. According to a Gainesville police spokesman, the police found Dunlap at 3:25 a.m. Tuesday, after they were alerted to a reckless driver near the Florida campus.

“Carlos obviously made a very poor decision,” Meyer said. “I have not spoke to him or his family yet. He’s not going to play. But I want to visit with him and his family first and go from there.”

The loss of Dunlap dulls one of the sharpest edges that Florida took into the most highly anticipated college football game of the season. The Gators rank No. 1 in scoring defense, total defense and pass defense.

One of Alabama’s weaknesses is the inexperience of its first-year starting quarterback, Greg McElroy, who has been productive but has never faced a situation as daunting as Saturday’s.

The Gators are expected to use several players to fill the void left by Dunlap’s absence.

Dunlap may be the Gators player selected highest in the N.F.L. draft next spring. He is tied for the team lead in sacks with 7 and also registered 6 pass breakups and 35 tackles.

The N.F.L. analyst Gil Brandt gushed about Dunlap’s ability. Dunlap is the prototype of the new breed of N.F.L. defensive ends who are 290 pounds but play as if they weigh 230. That means he can rush the quarterback and drop into coverage with equal proficiency.

Brandt said that having an athlete like Dunlap on defense was a lot like having the 6-foot-9 Magic Johnson playing point guard.

“I hate to use the word freak, but he has a God-given talent that very few people have,” Brandt said.

Florida’s defense returned all 11 of its starters from its national title team last season. That team held Alabama to 1 yard in the decisive fourth quarter of last year’s SEC title game and slowed Oklahoma, which had the most productive offense in college football history, in the B.C.S. title game.

Dunlap is expected to leave for the N.F.L. draft after this season, but his arrest could cost him.

“That’s an expensive night on the town,” Brandt said, noting that under the old salary system, the difference of a few slots in the draft meant millions of dollars.