 There was no blue-gray sky to provide the backdrop. No horseman, never mind four of them, to come to the rescue. There was no cosmic channeling of karma from Touchdown Jesus or a touch of luck from Fighting Irish legends like Knute, Ara or Lou.

Instead, a program steeped in lore is at a crossroads, its uncertain future again clashing with its mystical past.

Connecticut beat Notre Dame, 33-30, in double overtime Saturday, the latest setback for a program that has plunged into mediocrity.

This loss could be a defining one, the symbolic end of the Charlie Weis era after five seasons in South Bend. Weis has six years left on a contract that is probably going to cost the university more than $15 million to buy out. But a three-game losing streak, a second consecutive loss on senior day to a middling opponent and a trend of playing down to the competition have made Weis’s departure all but inevitable.

“Today’s not the day for me to reflect on things like that,” Weis said. He added that he would contemplate his future during his news media briefing Sunday afternoon.

On Saturday, Weis’s main concern was the 33 Notre Dame seniors who saw a 14-point lead turn into another heartbreaking loss.

“Today is the day for me to be worrying about those 33 guys,” Weis said. “I really feel absolutely miserable for those 33 guys.”

If the script from the latest Notre Dame loss looked familiar, that is because the Irish have emerged this season as college football’s consummate drama majors. Nine of Notre Dame’s past 10 games have been decided in the final 2 minutes 10 seconds, with most of those games in doubt until the final play. Notre Dame’s five losses have come by a combined 21 points, a sign that this team, much like the Weis era, kept coming up short.

Weis is 35-26 over all at Notre Dame, a record similar to his predecessors Bob Davie and Tyrone Willingham. Most damning is that Weis has gone 16-20 over the past three seasons, those in which he has played predominantly the players he recruited.

And in a fitting end to a game that will probably be synonymous with the end of his tenure, the Irish were frantically trying to call a timeout before Connecticut’s Andre Dixon ran in untouched from 4 yards for the decisive touchdown in the second overtime. Weis sent the defensive coordinator Corwin Brown sprinting down the sideline, as Weis called it, “trying to give us a little more time.”

As the day’s resplendent sunshine settled into dusk and the game stumbled toward overtime, the Irish appeared to be living on borrowed time.

Two Connecticut touchdowns that would have given the Huskies the lead during the final two minutes were negated because of holding penalties. After a fumble by Notre Dame’s Armando Allen Jr. put Connecticut in position to win in regulation, the sophomore kicker David Teggart pushed a 37-yard field-goal attempt left as time expired.

“I said, ‘Here we go again,’ ” said Connecticut Coach Randy Edsall, whose team has lost games this season on everything from a holding penalty in the end zone to an 81-yard touchdown pass with 22 seconds left.

But for a Connecticut team that has had to deal with the stabbing death of the junior cornerback Jasper Howard last month, the day ended with a victory Edsall called the best in program history.

“You’ve got to understand what this team has gone through,” Edsall said. “A couple of close games, and then you lose a teammate, you lose a brother, you lose a son, and you’re trying so hard to honor him by winning on the field.”

He added: “If it wasn’t emotional, to me, you’re not human.”

For Notre Dame, emotions and questions will be swirling until Jack Swarbrick, the university’s second-year athletic director, decides Weis’s fate. The decision could also affect the status of quarterback Jimmy Clausen, who has thrived this season and finished Saturday with 329 passing yards and 2 touchdowns.

Clausen, a junior, declined to say if Weis’s future would have an effect on his decision to stay at Notre Dame for his final season. When the four Notre Dame captains, linked arm in arm with Weis, led the team onto the field, it was a show of solidarity for a program that appears to be falling apart.

“He had tears coming down his face,” Clausen said of Weis during the pregame walk. “It’s hard we couldn’t get a victory for all those seniors and Coach Weis.”

But as Notre Dame finishes another lost season, the echoes of its storied past are nowhere to be heard. Soon, the search will almost certainly begin for the next coach with the tall task of trying to wake those echoes.

