The most storied award in college sports, the Heisman Trophy, has fully embraced the digital age just in time. This is the first year that the Heisman voting will be completely done electronically; the 925 voters are required to cast their ballots online by 5 p.m. Dec. 7.

Texas quarterback Colt McCoy emerged last week as the favorite, but veteran voters have deemed this one of the most wide-open races in the award’s 75-year history.

The field of finalists will be known two days earlier than usual; the electronic voting will allow Heisman officials to announce the finalists by Monday night.

The field appears to be whittled to four candidates: McCoy, Florida’s Tim Tebow, Stanford’s Toby Gerhart and Alabama’s Mark Ingram.

“I can’t remember a race this open,” said Kirk Bohls, a columnist for The Austin (Tex.) American-Statesman who has voted for the Heisman for more than 20 years. “It almost mirrors the way the teams have shaped up this year in that there hasn’t been a clear No. 1 team and there hasn’t been a clear favorite that’s run away with the Heisman. It’s almost like we’ve been waiting for someone to take it over.”

Bohls said he favored McCoy but was waiting to see what would happen next weekend, when Texas plays Nebraska and Florida plays Alabama. There is a chance that Tebow or Ingram could swipe the trophy with a huge game, but either would have to climb over McCoy. Gerhart is the only candidate who does not play next weekend, which can only hurt his chances.

“If a quarterback is going to win it, it’s going to be McCoy,” said Chris Huston, the creator of HeismanPundit.com. “If Tebow is going to win the Heisman twice, he’d really have to make it a slam dunk. And I think there will be enough residual votes for Ingram in the South to take away from Tebow.”

Here is a look at the four top candidates:

Colt McCoy

Texas, senior quarterback

WHY HE SHOULD WIN IT He has 27 touchdown passes, leads the nation in completion percentage and had a gangbusters game on Thursday night at Texas A&M. He has led the Longhorns to victories in 25 of their past 26 games, with the lone loss coming in the final seconds at Texas Tech last year. He has the brand name, the undefeated team and solid numbers.

WHY HE WON’T WIN IT All the other probable finalists have led their teams to wins against better teams. Texas’ best victory came at No. 22 Oklahoma State. The Southeastern Conference title game will receive so much hype that it could produce the winner. McCoy’s nine interceptions do not help.

THE CASE “If anybody has a better Heisman moment than that, I’d like to see it,” Texas Coach Mack Brown said of McCoy’s 304 passing yards and 175 rushing yards against Texas A&M.

Toby Gerhart

Stanford, senior running back

WHY HE SHOULD WIN IT His 26 rushing touchdowns lead the nation and have led Stanford’s improbable revival. His 13.83 points-responsible-for average makes him the only running back among the country’s top 40 in that category. Gerhart has mauled the opposition with his bruising style and had a great closing kick against Notre Dame, which included 205 rushing yards, 3 touchdowns and a touchdown pass.

WHY HE WON’T WIN IT His team has lost four games, including one to 5-7 Wake Forest. He was not among the preseason favorites, which is always difficult to overcome. The last West Coast Heisman winner not from the University of Southern California was Stanford’s Jim Plunkett in 1970.

THE CASE “I think Toby has said it all with the way he’s played,” Stanford Coach Jim Harbaugh said.

Tim Tebow

Florida, senior quarterback

WHY HE SHOULD WIN IT He clearly has the most recognizable name in college football, having won two national titles and received off-field publicity for his charity work. He has produced 30 touchdowns this year, and the Gators are on a 22-game winning streak. Tebow dominated in his final home game against Florida State (five touchdowns) and has the ultimate stage against No. 2 Alabama on Saturday.

WHY HE WON’T WIN IT Tebow’s 30 combined touchdowns running and passing pale in comparison with the 55 he had when he won the Heisman as a sophomore. It is difficult to win twice. Tebow’s numbers have been solid, but Florida practically spent the season apologizing for not being explosive on offense. There is also Tebow fatigue among some members of the news media that could hurt.

THE CASE “That’s the best college football player in America, period,” said Florida’s offensive coordinator, Steve Addazio. “It’s kind of a joke to me. You’re talking about a guy who does it all.”

Mark Ingram

Alabama, sophomore tailback

WHY HE SHOULD WIN IT He is the best offensive player on one of the elite teams, averaging 6.47 yards a carry and 119 yards a game. He has thrived in big games, with 150 yards against Virginia Tech, 246 against South Carolina and 144 against Louisiana State. Florida and a big opportunity await.

WHY HE WON’T WIN IT He rushed for only 30 yards against Auburn and left the compelling final drive with a hip pointer. His numbers pale in comparison with Gerhart’s, if voters are looking for a running back. His name recognition also hurts compared with McCoy’s and Tebow’s.

THE CASE “We feel like he’ll be fine for the game,” Alabama Coach Nick Saban said of Ingram’s chances of recovering and playing against Florida. 