Peter Tebow knew early on that things would change during his first year at the University of Florida.

He would return home to Jacksonville to watch his younger brother, Tim, play high school football and see cheerleaders from opposing teams ask for his brother’s autograph. Before Tim even enrolled at Florida, Peter Tebow was recognized by two girls while reading a book outside class and asked for a picture. Peter Tebow stopped by football practice one day, which ended up as a news item in The Tampa Tribune.

“How do you foresee your brother turning into a cult hero?” Peter Tebow said over dinner Monday night. “I don’t think there’s any way you could forecast that type of fame and notoriety.”

As Tim Tebow, 22, has won two national championships, a Heisman Trophy and perhaps more renown than any other recent college athlete, Peter Tebow, 25, has been by his side on campus as a support system.

Whether it is giving Tim a ride in a pinch, grabbing his dry cleaning to help avoid a mob of autograph seekers or living up to his family nickname, Help Desk, by setting up his Internet service, Peter Tebow has been there.

“He lets me be stupid, be my brother,” Tim Tebow said. “He gives me a hard time and after a tough day is a support system and lets me take my mind off of it.”

It is easy to recognize Peter; he has the smile, facial expressions and physical features of Tim. But Peter Tebow is about 5 feet 10 and 185 pounds, four inches shorter and 60 pounds lighter than his “little” brother.

“God makes us all differently, right?” Peter Tebow said with a smile.

It has been an occasionally uneasy existence at Florida for Peter Tebow, who said he cringed the first time he was introduced to someone as Tim’s brother. But after graduating with a 3.2 grade point average two years ago and serving an engineering internship at Walt Disney World, Peter Tebow returned to campus as a staff member for Campus Crusade for Christ. And in his five years on campus, through classes and work, he has found a niche in his brother’s broad shadow.

“Sometimes I feel bad, because that gets irritating to me, too,” Tim Tebow said. “He’s Peter Tebow. He’s not ‘my brother.’ But he has carved his own identity. More students probably know him than me. He’s made such an impact. Even guys on the team will be like, I saw your brother on campus today. He’s so much cooler than you.”

There are five Tebow siblings, including three boys, and it was apparent early on that Peter Tebow would be different from his older brother, Robby, who played football at Carson-Newman, and Tim.

Peter Tebow sheepishly admits to being “half geek.” He smiles while saying his favorite book growing up was “The Way Things Work.” Tim Tebow recalls his brother taking apart and putting together their remote control cars, and at 12 Peter built his own radio station.

“No one listened to it,” Tim Tebow said with a hearty laugh. “But it went eight miles in circumference. Who does that?”

While Peter Tebow was winning science fairs, he also played a bit of football. He said that because the Tebows were raised on a farm in Jacksonville, toughness was inherent. He shows scars on his hands from barbed wire and recalls shoveling cow manure and baling hay.

“He was never as strong, but he was just as tough, if not tougher, than me and Robby ever were,” Tim Tebow said.

Peter Tebow, a 170-pound linebacker, was the defensive most valuable player of Trinity Christian Academy’s state championship team his senior year. He had 172 tackles, far more than Tim, who was a freshman.

“He always knew where the ball was, and he was always there,” their mother, Pam Tebow, said. “Timmy had no clue where the ball was.”

These days, Tim Tebow is about to head to the N.F.L. and hopes to use the brand name he built at Florida to start a charitable empire. Peter Tebow plans to head to graduate school for master’s degrees in divinity and theology. He has participated on the mission trips of his father, Bob, since he was young and has a passion for missionary work.

Last summer, Peter Tebow did missionary work with Campus Crusade in East Asia, a trip separate from his father’s work. He and the group performed campus ministry at a large university in a country where evangelism is not legal, which was why he said he could not reveal the exact location.

With missionary work in his future, Peter Tebow is happy he was able to make a difference in so many lives on campus. Pam Tebow said she had been at speaking engagements as far away as Delaware and heard stories of how Peter helped changed someone’s life.

“A lot of the decisions people make in college tend to shape the direction and the course of their life,” Peter Tebow said. “Being involved in that process with other people was extremely fulfilling to me.”

Peter Tebow acknowledges that people have come to Campus Crusade meetings because of his famous brother. But Jimmy Trent, the program’s director at Florida, said that soon after meeting Peter, people think of him as his own person because of his disarming nature. Yet Trent nicknamed Peter Tebow the Bull because of the energy he brings to preaching.

“His passion for what he does is contagious,” Trent said. “A lot of what you see on TV with Tim and his passion for football runs in the blood of the Tebow family.”

While reaching out to others on campus, Peter Tebow has been able to ride shotgun on his brother’s spectacular college career.

“It’s a unique situation,” he said. “Being able to be part of it all has been fun.” 