As this Florida season teeters on the verge of history, the Gators continue to beat their opponents and lose to their toughest competition.

Riley Cooper's 68-yard touchdown accounted for more than a third of Florida's 199 passing yards.

Top-ranked Florida moved closer to its second consecutive national title Saturday with a teeth-gnashing 24-14 victory over South Carolina. Throughout their undefeated season, however, the Gators cannot seem to control their biggest nemesis — the past dominance of Florida teams.

Expected to be a team of unprecedented production, the Gators have simply settled for being stellar. Florida could become the first team in a half-century to win three undisputed national titles in four years. But the Gators’ inability to rack up blowouts the way last season’s national title team did has left them in a bizarre situation: a team chasing a national title but seeming like an underachiever.

“We did not play perfect,” Florida Coach Urban Meyer said. “Obviously. But I’m not sure we have played perfect in quite a while.”

Fair or not, Florida’s season has been defined by drama more than dominance. With the Gators (10-0, 8-0 Southeastern Conference) barreling toward a date with No. 3 Alabama in the SEC title game on Dec. 5, there has been more attention to the Gators’ shortcomings than to their accomplishments.

From a too-close victory over Tennessee to Tim Tebow’s concussion to multiple controversies with officials and, finally, Brandon Spikes’s suspension for gouging the eyes of an opposing player, the Gators have dealt with enough problems that Meyer has blocked out the outside world.

“My computer has not been turned on,” said Meyer, who said he relied on his wife, Shelley, for updates on current events.

Despite all the commotion, these Gators have cobbled together one of the finest seasons in recent college football history. For the first time under Meyer, Florida finished its SEC regular season undefeated.

The Gators are on a 20-game winning streak, the longest in college football. Of those 20 games, they have won 19 by double digits. Florida just has not dominated the way it did last season, when it set a record by winning six straight SEC games by at least 28 points.

This season, the Gators have been adequate victors, going from an innovative offensive team to a blue-and-orange version of some of Jim Tressel’s early teams at Ohio State. Florida has become a team with a great defense, efficient special teams and just enough offense.

The Gators are seemingly in a perpetual state of third-and-long on offense, as Tebow does not have the weapons around him that he had last season, and he may no longer be a factor in the Heisman Trophy race. He completed 14 of 25 passes for 199 yards and a touchdown. He rushed for 26 yards, including a 1-yard score in the fourth quarter that tied him with Kevin Faulk of Louisiana State for the SEC career touchdown record with 53.

“There’s been so many times this year we could panic and say: ‘We haven’t done this. We haven’t done this,’ ” Tebow said. “But that hasn’t happened.”

A recurring story line surfaced again for the Gators, who sputtered in the red zone. Caleb Sturgis booted a field goal from 32 yards in the first quarter but missed three other attempts.

But the biggest concern for the Gators may be how South Carolina, with Coach Steve Spurrier taking more control of the play calling, moved the ball. Spurrier, another old Florida ghost, deftly mixed runs and passes to gain 206 yards in the first half.

South Carolina finished with just 247 yards. Wide receiver Moe Brown was central to the play that turned the game. On the first play of the fourth quarter, defensive tackle Justin Trattou intercepted a ball that deflected off Brown’s hands and returned it 53 yards. Four plays later, Tebow sealed the victory with a 1-yard touchdown plunge.

Meyer credited Trattou for playing through a torn biceps tendon.

“I’m just a normal guy from New Jersey,” said Trattou, who is from Ramsey and played at Don Bosco Prep.

Meyer said that Trattou’s interception should go in the Gators’ history books. This game, however, came straight from the Gators’ playbook this year.

“Florida played pretty well,” Spurrier said. “I don’t know if, by their standards, that they played super.”

And as Florida chases college football history, it could win the national title and never beat its toughest opponent this season — its own history. 