Football is so enmeshed with Alabama’s identity that women wear houndstooth scarves to match their purses and babies are rocked to sleep from Mobile to Muscle Shoals with whispered tales about Bear Bryant.

Florida quarterback Tim Tebow was dropped by Rolando McClain in the second quarter. Tebow was held to 247 yards passing and 63 rushing. More Photos »
Enlarge This Image
Pouya Dianat/Reuters

Mark Ingram was the center of a celebration after the second of his three rushing touchdowns — equal to the number Florida had allowed all season. More Photos >

With a 32-13 win over No. 1 Florida in the Southeastern Conference title game on Saturday, the No. 2 Crimson Tide is poised to reclaim what many of its fans consider their birthright — the top spot in college football.

The victory assures the Crimson Tide a spot in the Bowl Championship Series title game Jan. 7 in Pasadena, Calif. Alabama will almost certainly play No. 3 Texas, which needed a last-second field goal to beat Nebraska, 13-12, in the Big 12 title game.

“That’s real big for us, to bring a national championship home to Tuscaloosa,” Alabama nose tackle Terrence Cody said. “To do that, that would be real big for us, the program for years to come.”

Behind the sturdy running of Mark Ingram, the impeccable play of quarterback Greg McElroy and a pass rush that flustered Florida quarterback Tim Tebow, the Crimson Tide is a game away from the program’s first national championship since 1992.

The loss ended Florida’s 22-game winning streak and foiled its chances of becoming the first team in a half-century to win three undisputed national titles in four seasons.

“We’re kind of in a territory we haven’t been in a while,” Florida Coach Urban Meyer said.

Alabama claims 12 national championships in its storied history. If the Crimson Tide plays as flawlessly Jan. 7 as it did Saturday, a 13th title will be almost a certainty.

“It’s our 22nd SEC championship,” McElroy said after the game, showing that he, too, is versed in Alabama football lore. “Hopefully, No. 13 will be coming home soon.”

Using a deft mix of rushing and passing, Alabama racked up 490 yards against a Florida defense that entered the game ranked No. 1 in both scoring and total defense. The loss was Florida’s worst since a 31-3 defeat at Alabama in 2005.

“I’ve never been prouder of a group of players,” Alabama Coach Nick Saban said.

McElroy entered this game with a reputation as a caretaker, the kind of steady quarterback who does just enough for his team to win the game. He left it as a playmaker and emotional leader, flexing his muscles to exhort the crowd and looking like the best player on the field for much of the game. He finished 12 of 18 passing for 239 yards, a touchdown and no interceptions.

Keeping with the attitude that Saban has established, McElroy said the victory was a tribute to all the work that the Tide had put in since being blown off the field in the fourth quarter of last year’s SEC title game.

“I think it all came full circle in the sense that all the things we’ve done,” he said. “All the 110s we’ve run and blood, sweat, conditioning, all the reps in the weight room, that’s what it’s all for, taking a knee against Florida to win the SEC championship.”

Ingram was dynamic as well, making a strong case to add another piece to Alabama’s rich football history. No Crimson Tide player has ever won the Heisman Trophy, and Ingram’s performance will help his chances.

He ran through would-be tackles all afternoon on his way to 113 yards rushing on 28 carries and 76 receiving yards. His three rushing touchdowns equaled the amount of rushing touchdowns the Gators had yielded all season.

He is almost assured an invitation to the Heisman Trophy ceremony in New York and is probably the front-runner for the award after his most obvious competitor, Texas quarterback Colt McCoy, struggled mightily against Nebraska.

“I would feel real good to go represent our school, this rich tradition that we have and all the Alabama family,” Ingram said. He added that he did not know if he would be able to visit his father, the former Giants receiver Mark Ingram, who is incarcerated in Queens.

The lasting image of the day for Tebow came with less than a minute remaining. He wept on the bench as the clock ticked down, and when his image was shown on the giant video board in the Georgia Dome, Alabama fans let out perhaps the day’s loudest cheer.

“We hear a lot about him being one of the most dominant players to play college football and stuff and all that, we hear that all the time,” Cody said. “For us to dominate him, it meant a lot to us.”

Tebow finished 20 of 35 passing for 247 yards, 1 touchdown and 1 interception — a turnover that ended any faint hope of a Florida comeback with 11 minutes 51 seconds left in the game.

Tebow’s career, considered among the best in the history of college football, will end in the Sugar Bowl, where the Gators will probably play No. 5 Cincinnati.

“This is not how we wanted to finish our season in the SEC,” Tebow said. “There were a lot of goals and a lot we won’t be able to accomplish.

“It was frustrating. To say it wasn’t would be a lie.”

Ultimately, the loss can be attributed to Florida’s startling deficiencies on defense. The Gators’ usually dominant defense left the game humbled, listening to Alabama fans singing their trademark cheer, “Rammer Jammer Yellow Hammer,” with voices raspy from a long day of cheering.

Now, the Tide will move on to Pasadena for a shot at another national title. In football-crazed Alabama, it will mark a return to order in the football universe. 