 Even as Washington tries to rein in Wall Street pay, bankers are likely to make unusually large gains on the stock grants and options they received after shares in their companies fell sharply during the financial meltdown.

Banks cut bonuses last year and shifted more pay into stock and options from cash, a tactic that lawmakers supported for its emphasis on long-term performance. Within months, the financial system began to mend -- partly with the help of billions of dollars in government aid -- and that stock began surging in value. Some of it can be cashed in starting in just a few months.

And so the bonuses Wall Street received last year, billed as paltry at the time, are turning out to be among the most lucrative payouts ever.

Goldman Sachs, for instance, sharply cut nearly all bonuses it paid last year but gave some executives more options than usual.

The company gave its general counsel, for example, 104,868 stock options and 14,117 shares in December, when the bank's stock was around $78.

Now the bank's shares have more than doubled in value, making that stock and option award worth nearly $12 million, according to Equilar, an executive compensation research firm in Redwood Shores, Calif.

That executive is just one of many Wall Street workers who have seen the bonuses they received last year soar in value, even though some of the shares cannot be sold for a few years.

Goldman's bonus pool last year was $4.82 billion, according to the New York attorney general's office, but because about half of that was paid in stock, it is now worth upwards of $7.8 billion. At JPMorgan Chase, workers have seen the value of the stock awarded them last year increase at least $3 billion.

''People have to look at the sizable gains that have been made since stock and options were granted last year, and the fact is this was, in many ways, a windfall,'' said Jesse M. Brill, the chairman of CompensationStandards.com, a trade publication. ''This had nothing to do with people's performance. These were granted at market lows.''

Wall Street has long used a mix of stock and cash for bonuses. But the greater emphasis on cash before the financial crisis began meant executives could walk away rich even as their companies collapsed.

That has left many on Wall Street -- and in Washington -- demanding that a greater portion of pay be made in stock in hopes of rewarding long-term performance rather than short-term bets.

The Treasury's special master of pay, Kenneth R. Feinberg, has said there is ''too much reliance on cash'' on Wall Street and has proposed stock as an alternative.

Banks began the trend by paying more in stock last year. Then, in February, Congress required that bonuses at bailed-out banks be paid entirely in stock. Last month, the Treasury Department took the idea further by proposing that some executives' salaries be paid in stock. The result is that Wall Street workers have more of their pay at risk than ever.

Still, some compensation experts say the risk has been decreased by the government's backing of the financial system and historically low stock prices. After all, they point out, companies like JPMorgan, American Express and Capital One issued stock and options last year when their share prices had little chance of going anywhere but up.

The stock gains raise questions about the wisdom of pushing pay too far in either direction, favoring either cash or stock. Normal theories about stock compensation and risk-taking may not hold true today, compensation experts say, in large part because of the government's continued financial support of the industry.

And they say the upside at many banks is far bigger than the downside, particularly for banks like Bank of America and Citigroup that have not yet seen their shares recover. 