 One year and two bailouts later, Bank of America is moving to extricate itself from Washington's grip.

With the financial industry on the mend, the giant bank announced several measures on Monday to reduce its reliance on federal aid. The moves are likely to presage a wider effort to repay the many billions of bailout dollars that propped up the bank during the worst of the financial crisis.

But the upbeat news came as Bank of America's troubled takeover of Merrill Lynch -- a watershed moment of the financial crisis -- continued to reverberate through Washington and Wall Street. Bank of America on Monday defied a request by Representative Edolphus Towns, Democrat of New York, to divulge more details about the star-crossed acquisition. Few expect the controversy to end there.

Despite the uproar over the Merrill deal, Bank of America and its leader, Kenneth D. Lewis, are moving quickly disentangle the bank from the federal bailout program. The bank said that it would pay the government $425 million for unused federal guarantees against losses at Merrill.

Bank of America is also working to convince federal regulators that it is sound enough to repay billions in federal aid, according to people familiar with the bank's plans. And on Monday, the bank named a new director to its board as part of a continuing effort to break with its troubled past. The director, Charles O. Holliday Jr., is the sixth new member to join the 15-person board since the summer.

Analysts characterized it as a day of progress for Bank of America, despite the nagging troubles over Merrill.

''What the bank is trying to show is that it's come back to health and that it's operated solely as a private entity in the marketplace,'' said Richard X. Bove, a banking analyst at Rochdale Securities. ''But the bank is still under this enormous political pressure from Congress, the S.E.C. and the attorney general of New York.''

A Bank of America spokesman said the bank's next step would be to start repaying $45 billion in federal bailout money. If regulators approve, the bank hopes to pay back at least $20 billion within months.

The bank announced its exit from two government programs on Monday. In addition to the Merrill guarantees, under which the government would have absorbed some of the losses on the brokerage company's assets, Bank of America also said it had exited a program run by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that provided government backing for the bank's own debt. Those two moves came after five other steps the bank said it had taken to ''reduce its reliance on government support and return to normal market funding,'' the bank said.

''We are a stronger company than we were even a few months ago,'' Mr. Lewis, the chief executive, said in a statement. ''We believe we have all the pieces in place to emerge from this current economic crisis as one of the leading financial services firms in the world.''

Mr. Lewis has also been trying to smooth relations with regulators. He met with Timothy F. Geithner, the secretary of the Treasury, in recent weeks and has put in place a succession plan in response to regulators' concern that the bank had not thought through who would take over when he eventually leaves.

Many stock market investors attach little stigma to the bailouts, said Jason Goldberg, an analyst with Barclays Capital. Indeed, the shares of banks that have accepted money from the Troubled Asset Relief Program are actually trading better in some cases than those that have returned it, he said.

''TARP doesn't make you a bad company,'' Mr. Goldberg said. ''At the moment, it doesn't appear to bother the market.''

But the Merrill deal is still dogging Bank of America and Mr. Lewis. Since the bank acquired Merrill Lynch, Bank of America's management has come under intense scrutiny over information it had given to shareholders. The pressures grew last week when the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform demanded that the bank give up its right to keep private some of its legal documents related to the merger. 