Steven Rattner, one of the president’s leading advisers on the automotive industry, was an investor in the investment fund that controlled Chrysler and GMAC, according to financial disclosures released by the government.

Mr. Rattner joined the Treasury Department as a senior adviser in late February after a career as an investment banker that dated to the early 1980s. In that time, Mr. Rattner amassed a personal fortune in the hundreds of millions of dollars, according to the disclosures.

The disclosures, which are required of White House employees, covered only 2008 and the beginning of this year, but they listed Mr. Rattner’s earnings from various roles, including about $3 million for his role at his own investment firm and $250,000 for his role as a board member of IAC/InterActiveCorp, a media company.

The income allowed him to purchase a Fifth Avenue apartment, an airplane and a horse farm in North Salem, N.Y.

Mr. Rattner, 56, has led the automotive task force that has worked with Chrysler and General Motors to overhaul their businesses. He was personally involved in firing the chief executive of General Motors and negotiated with Chrysler’s creditors in an unsuccessful effort to avoid bankruptcy of that company.

But Mr. Rattner had a prior relationship with Cerberus Capital Management, an investment firm in New York that owned the majority of Chrysler and GMAC, the financing arm of General Motors. Mr. Rattner invested $500,000 to $1 million in a Cerberus fund that invested in auto parts companies. He also invested in an Asian fund run by Cerberus as well as Ableco Finance, a direct-lending business that is part of Cerberus.

The disclosure said that Mr. Rattner would divest any Cerberus holdings that presented a conflict, and a Treasury official confirmed that he had done so.

“Like all employees, Steven Rattner was required to comply with financial conflict of interest rules, including divestitures where needed, and he has done so fully,” said Jenni Engebretsen, a spokeswoman for the Treasury Department.

A spokesman for Cerberus declined to comment on Mr. Rattner’s relationship with Cerberus.

Cerberus was one of many investment firms that counted Mr. Rattner as an investor. But the investments of the other funds seemed by and large less tied to the auto industry that the funds run by Cerberus.

Mr. Rattner, who began his career as a journalist and worked at The New York Times until the early 1980s, had one other tie to Cerberus when he accepted the government post. An investment firm that he founded, the Quadrangle Group, owned a magazine company that was involved in a debt conflict with Cerberus. That company, Alpha Media, had borrowed money from Cerberus and late last year, it failed to meet its debt payments.

Quadrangle was also involved in controversy last month when it was tied to a scandal involving the New York State pension fund.

The Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York attorney general have accused some officials involved with the pension plan of accepting bribes from investment funds that wanted to manage money for the fund. Quadrangle was one investment firm mentioned in the complaint, although neither Mr. Rattner nor Quadrangle have been charged with wrongdoing.