The private investment firm co-founded by Steven Rattner, the Treasury official leading the White House’s efforts to revamp the auto industry, has won a vote of confidence among its investors, according to a person briefed on the matter, relieving some of the pressure on the firm.

Steven Rattner left the investment firm he co-founded, the Quadrangle Group, for a position in the Obama administration.

Investors in the firm, the Quadrangle Group, could have tried to cancel their future payments to it and block it from making new bets. The vote, which ended Friday, was set off by Mr. Rattner’s departure in February, when he took the Treasury post.

It is a tense time for Quadrangle, a division of which manages the fortune of New York’s mayor, Michael R. Bloomberg. It is one of the most well-known firms now embroiled in an investigation by the New York attorney general into investments made by the New York State pension fund.

Mr. Rattner was personally involved in discussions with officials at several pension funds that had invested in Quadrangle. State and federal authorities contend that he hired a firm that had been run by Hank Morris, a now-indicted associate of New York’s former comptroller, to help gain business in New York.

While the New York pension fund accounted for just 5 percent of the money in one of Quadrangle’s funds, the state’s prestige helped Mr. Rattner attract other big investors. Hiring placement advisers like Mr. Morris can be legal but can also raise ethical questions.

In addition, a Securities and Exchange Commission complaint related to the matter says that a company owned by one of Quadrangle’s funds agreed to a movie distribution deal that benefited a state official, David Loglisci, who has also been indicted.

Neither Mr. Rattner nor Quadrangle has been charged with wrongdoing, but both remain under investigation.

At stake in the vote over Quadrangle’s future was the firm’s ability to use about $200 million for new investments. Private equity investors typically commit to finance investments in the future, but when an executive like Mr. Rattner departs, there are often clauses that allow them to try to back out.

Had Quadrangle lost the vote, its fees could have been reduced sharply. A losing vote also would have signaled an erosion of investor confidence, which could have made it hard for the firm to raise more money.

New York City’s comptroller, William C. Thompson Jr., said in a statement on Friday that three pension funds in the city would vote to cut off Quadrangle. But individual investors were not allowed to pull their money on their own. A majority of the fund’s investors, weighted by the size of their investment, had to vote against Quadrangle for any change to be made.

Other pension investors in Quadrangle include Calpers, the big California pension fund; Calstrs, the state’s retirement fund for teachers; and New Jersey’s pension fund. It is not known how they voted.

Quadrangle’s funds have suffered during the economic downturn but not as much as some other private equity funds. Mr. Rattner is still a substantial investor in the funds, though he is no longer involved in its operations. Mr. Rattner worked as a reporter for The New York Times before he went into investment banking in the 1980s. 