A federal judge told the Securities and Exchange Commission on Tuesday to give a better explanation of why it had agreed to a settlement with Bank of America over bonus disclosures without pressing the bank’s executives harder.

Judge Jed S. Rakoff posed questions about the marriage of Bank of America and Merrill Lynch.

The order, by Judge Jed S. Rakoff, came a day after the agency revealed that lawyers advised Bank of America’s executives not to disclose in a shareholder proxy billions of dollars in bonuses paid by Merrill Lynch just before the two merged.

This month the judge asked the two sides to say who at the bank had made the decision not to disclose Merrill’s planned bonuses just ahead of a shareholder vote on the merger.

Both responded in a filing Monday by citing lawyers for the bank, although Bank of America did not name the executives who had approved the lawyers’ decisions. The S.E.C. said it had not pressed the issue further because the bank wanted its communications with its lawyers to remain private under attorney-client privilege. And without such information, the S.E.C. could not consider charges against individuals at the bank.

Responding swiftly, the judge questioned why the S.E.C. did not insist that Bank of America waive attorney-client privilege before striking a $33 million settlement. He also questioned whether bank executives — or the outside lawyers — should be charged in the case.

“If the company does not waive the privilege,” the judge wrote in his order, “the culpability of both the corporate officer and the company counsel will remain beyond scrutiny. This seems so at war with common sense.” The judge added that the filings Monday by the S.E.C. and Bank of America raised more questions than they answered, and set a deadline of Sept. 9 for both parties to come back with fuller explanations of who should be held accountable for the bonus disclosure decision.

“It is extremely unusual for a judge to want to look under the bonnet,” said George B. Newhouse Jr., a former prosecutor and now a partner at Brown, White & Newhouse, a law firm in Los Angeles. “Implicitly, the judge is questioning whether the S.E.C. have given away the farm.”

The bank may have already effectively waived its ability to protect its lawyers by testifying about their role to the S.E.C., Mr. Newhouse added.

The case centers on $3.6 billion bonuses that were paid out by Merrill Lynch late last year, just before that firm was merged with Bank of America. Neither company disclosed the bonuses to shareholders, and the S.E.C. has charged that the companies’ proxy statement about the merger were misleading in their description of the bonuses.

In a statement Tuesday, a Bank of America spokesman said the bonuses would not have had a big effect on the shareholder vote.

“We presented to shareholders the strategic logic of the Bank of America and Merrill Lynch combination and we believe that is what shareholders were voting for,” said Lawrence Di Rita, the spokesman.

Bank of America settled the S.E.C.’s allegations this month for a fine. Judge Rakoff, who works in the Southern District of New York, was assigned to decide whether to approve the settlement and has taken the unusual step of raising questions about it.

After the S.E.C. and the bank reply in two weeks, the judge will decide whether to hold a second hearing. Ultimately, the judge will decide whether to reject the settlement, and if he does, that will send the S.E.C. back to the bargaining table with the bank. The S.E.C. could also choose to take the case to court or drop it.