Wade F. B. Thompson, who revived the beloved Airstream brand of travel trailers and led a campaign to renovate the historic Park Avenue Armory in Manhattan, died on Nov. 12 at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. He was 69.

The cause was complications of colon cancer, said his wife, Angela Thompson.

A native of New Zealand, Mr. Thompson earned a bachelor of commerce degree in 1962 and won a scholarship to attend New York University, where he earned an M.B.A, in 1964. He started his career in the mergers and acquisitions department at Sperry & Hutchinson, the company that distributed S&H Green Stamps.

But he wanted to run a company of his own and he found an eager partner in Peter Orthwein, whom he had met in 1976 at an Association for Corporate Growth lunch. The two soon bought the Hi-Lo Trailer Company, an Ohio maker of travel trailers. The price for the company was less than $1 million, Mr. Orthwein recalled, because the trailer industry had fallen out of favor in the years after the gasoline lines of the 1970s.

“Neither of us knew anything about recreational vehicles,” Mr. Orthwein said. “But the company had a bunch of cash on its balance sheet and assets we could borrow against.”

In 1980, the two formed Thor Industries — named using the first two letters of their last names — and bought Airstream, then a money-losing subsidiary of Beatrice Foods. The brand had a long history and a revered line of products: ovoid-shaped, aluminum-side trailers that were originally based on the design of the Pan Am Clipper, one of the early trans-Atlantic passenger planes.

The company survived the Depression and prospered for decades. But the oil supply crisis of the ’70s had hurt Airstream, which lost $12 million the year before Thor Industries bought it.

A detail-oriented man with an aversion to debt, Mr. Thompson showed up at Airstream’s headquarters, in Jackson Center, Ohio, and handed out black pens, telling employees, “There isn’t going to be any more red ink at this company.”

With Mr. Thompson in charge of day-to-day operations — he flew to Ohio during the work week, and returned to his home in Scarsdale, N.Y., on the weekend — Thor laid off a number of managers, eliminated fictitious warranty claims by dealers and reconfigured the product line to make it more profitable.

The company went public in 1984 and eventually branched out into making motor homes and transit buses. At the company’s peak, in 2006, it sold more than 100,000 trailers, buses and motor homes.

Besides Angela, his wife of 42 years, his survivors include two children, Charles A. Y. Thompson and Amanda Jane Thompson Riegel, and six grandchildren.

After they became empty-nesters, Mr. Thompson and his wife moved to Manhattan from Scarsdale. They lived for a time across the street from the Park Avenue Armory, once known as the Seventh Regiment Armory, which for many years served as both a military installation and a social gathering site for some of the most famous of New York’s Gilded Age families.

But the building had been neglected, and its condition appalled him. He spent more than a decade and $35 million of his own money to help restore it. After starting a conservancy for the Armory, modeled on the one that cares for Central Park, Mr. Thompson and a group of allies persuaded the state to give the conservancy a 99-year lease to update, repair and care for the building. The lease began in 2006.

“We’re still in the cleanup stage,” said Rebecca Robertson, the chief executive of the conservancy. “There used to be vermin, lead paint and leaky roofs in here.” Now, she said, there are concerts and art exhibits.