A BUNCH of the guys drove straight to a bar. You get laid off from a job that pays $15 an hour, plus health care and other benefits — it’s Miller time. Time for a convoy to one of the watering holes in this town, 80 miles west of Omaha, where you can buy a beer at 10 in the morning.

Few of the employees of Katana Summit, a wind-tower manufacturer, saw it coming. On that day in early August, and in another round of cuts a few weeks later, about half of the plant’s 195-person payroll was eliminated, a shock that came with one notable consolation: the executives said they hoped to hire everyone back soon.

They seemed to mean it, too. As Kevin Strudthoff, the chief executive, explained that day, this was a “temporary layoff,” but there was a limit to what Katana could promise. The company, privately held, said it landed a multimillion-dollar deal last year to provide 225 wind towers to a turbine maker that it declined to identify. But when the credit crisis hit, wind-farm developers found it all but impossible to raise money, killing demand for wind towers.

In June, the turbine maker called Katana and said it was temporarily suspending its order. Layoffs were then inevitable.

Charles Salak, a burly, 39-year-old welder with an unruly goatee, was among the newly jobless that morning. But instead of commiserating with friends at the Sahara Lounge, he drove directly to the unemployment office, or Workforce Development, as it is called here. He was thinking about his wife and three children and how nuts he would go without a paycheck and something to do. Why not start looking right away?

“I was getting these text messages from my friends saying: ‘Where are you?’ We got a cold one for you,’ ” he recalled over lunch at a local fast-food chain called Runza. “I just wrote them back and said, ‘Nah, you guys drink it.’ ”

The question now is whether that order for 225 towers will be scaled back or canceled. If it’s canceled, Katana Summit won’t operate at even a fraction of full capacity anytime soon and won’t need Charles Salak and his co-workers for the foreseeable future — if, indeed, it ever needs them again.

It is early September, and Mr. Salak and Mr. Strudthoff — the semiterminated and the semiterminator — are living parallel lives. Neither of these men is idle, but each is living in that awkward, immiserating limbo where it’s clear, or maybe just clearer than usual, that your future and financial well-being are determined by forces beyond your control.

That limbo is arguably the quintessential American experience of the moment. When the Great Recession is dissected into its component parts, this might be remembered as the Waiting Phase. It’s not as scary as the Plummeting Phase of last year, or as event-filled as the To-the-Ramparts Phase of several months ago, but that doesn’t make it any easier.

A real recovery, we have heard time and again, won’t begin in earnest until the jobless rate, now at a 26-year high of 9.7 percent, starts to fall. But what will it take for the rehiring to start? What do companies like Katana need to see before they call back people like Charles Salak?

What, in other words, are we waiting for?

Every company has a different answer, because every company is linked to a different piece of the Rube Goldberg contraption that is our economy. In the case of Mr. Salak and Katana, the wait is connected to a broad array of factors: the flow of credit, green power initiatives, dozens of small and large choices in the hands of people who live far from here.

Ultimately, though, the wait at Katana boils down to a phone call. Under terms of the deal, the turbine maker had until the close of business on Sept. 25 — last Friday — to decide whether to scale back its order or walk away from it altogether.

Stop or go. Wait or get back to work. At the time of this visit to Columbus, nobody knew what would happen.

“I hope they call us early in the day,” said Mr. Strudthoff a couple of weeks back. “That would be courteous.”

COLUMBUS, a city of 21,000, has the highest per-capita rate of manufacturing employment of any place in Nebraska. It produces car seats, burger patties, ethanol, bug traps, dog kennels, grain tubs — the list goes on. A handful of Fortune 500 companies have a presence here.