LONG before the number was redolent of bailouts and bank failure, David Neff decided that Trillion was the perfect name for his clothing store here on Worth Avenue, this town’s boulevard of luxe retail.

The idea was to brace customers for the you’ve-got-to-be-joking price tags — $6,800 for a sport jacket, $800 for a button-down shirt — and to convey unparalleled opulence.

“We wanted people to know that this is a lot,” Mr. Neff says, gesturing to the clothing, “and we didn’t want anyone to open next door with a store that sounded like it might be more.”

Until last year, this idea actually seemed reasonable.

Then the meltdown vaporized the portfolios of multimillionaires here and, soon after, a beloved Wall Street wizard and Palm Beach homeowner named Bernie Madoff was unmasked as a fraud.

For years, Mr. Madoff’s elusive genius act beguiled his Jewish neighbors, as well as friends of those neighbors, and so on, and so on, until vast chunks of local money were hoovered into his Ponzi scheme. Life savings, dreams, and countless inheritances, gone.

“A guy stood right there and cried,” says Mr. Neff, pointing at a table covered with $800 cashmere cable knit sweaters. “And he told me he’d lost it all, his wife lost it all, his daughter lost it all. He said to me, ‘I had everything with Bernie.’ ”

A lot of regular customers haven’t been seen in Trillion since Hurricane Madoff struck in December — including, of course, the hurricane himself.

The last time he was here, he fell for a $2,000 pair of worsted spun cashmere pants, which Trillion didn’t have in his size, and had to be ordered from Italy.

After the slacks arrived, but before Mr. Madoff could come by for a fitting, he was arrested.

“I remember I heard about the arrest and I went directly to the store to charge those pants on his credit card,” recalls Mr. Neff, a fit, gray-haired man in perpetual motion. “But the card had already been canceled.”

So, what happened to the pants?

“They’re in the racks, over there,” Mr. Neff says, nodding toward the trouser section.

Wait a minute.

You have Bernie Madoff’s unclaimed $2,000 pants, on a rack, in this store?

“Uh-hmm,” he says, with a slightly abashed grin. “Would you like to see them?”

NOBODY keeps a statistic called “fortunes lost per square mile,” but let’s crunch some numbers.

Palm Beach has just 10,200 residents on a land mass that is not quite three times the size of Central Park. It’s so packed with wealth that the joke here is that calling someone a “millionaire” is an insult.

Given the density of the superrich, given the roughly 20 percent decline in the value of real estate since the housing bust, and given the concussive impact of Mr. Madoff, Palm Beach might well have this dubious distinction: the net worth of the average resident here has recently plunged, in absolute terms, by more than the average net worth of residents in any other town or city in the country.

Of course, when your $50 million is cut to a third, you’ve lost a lot of money but you’re still rich by any sane standard. And real estate agents say they don’t know of any foreclosures here, which means the place is relatively unscathed, compared with Florida’s new tumbleweed suburbs.

But you don’t often find catastrophic loss in the midst of spectacular plenty. It’s a bizarre combination, and we’ve come to see how Palm Beach is handling it. The answer is not very well, though the trauma here is, for the most part, invisible to the naked eye. Public displays of affliction are not Palm Beach’s style.

To learn what ails the place, you need to talk to retailers and the rare chatty local. Palm Beach, they will tell you, is reeling and much of it is seething, too. Jews and gentiles here have long lived and socialized in different spheres, with some of the latter quietly irked to find more of the former moving in every year. The Madoff scheme targeted the Jewish populace, as everyone knows, and among Jews there is a galling sense that the gentiles are privately thrilled by the fiasco.

As paranoid as this might sound, it has a ring of truth to Laurence Leamer, a Palm Beach resident and author of “Madness Under the Royal Palms,” a history of the island.