 If you're driving alone through the plains of Nebraska and need a little company, you can't do better than the nationally syndicated maestros of political talk radio. Hour after hour, rant after rant, it is a feast of words and feverish emotion, interrupted only by regular commercials and the occasional call from the awe-struck fan.

I'd heard these voices before, but only in sound bites. When you don't own a car and don't tune in at home, you probably don't run into Michael Savage, Rush Limbaugh or Mark Levin. On the highways of the Cornhusker State, they ran into me, every time I hit the scan button. After a while, it felt like a series of visits from very colorful and highly agitated relatives. Or it would if I had a lot of relatives certain that America is slouching toward a socialist abyss.

The apparent influence of these conservative talk professionals has caused more hand-wringing than usual in recent weeks, in the wake of our summer of angry town hall meetings and the ''You lie!'' outburst of Representative Joe Wilson of South Carolina. And when you hear Barack Obama likened to Pol Pot -- as Mr. Savage did in a recent show-- you can understand the concern. But to my uninitiated ears, there was something reassuringly familiar about political talk radio, and not because I know a lot about firebrands.

It's because I listen to a lot of rap. Gangsta rap, in particular.

I'll admit that the parallels between Jay-Z and Rush Limbaugh do not seem obvious, and to grasp them you need to look beyond the violence and misogyny that have made rap a favorite target of the right wing. (Come to think of it, perhaps each of these realms will be chagrined to be likened to the other.) But as soon as you dig beneath the surface, the similarities between talk radio and gangsta rap are nothing short of uncanny. And these similarities are revealing, too.

But before we get to the revelations, let's examine the kinship. For great careers in both businesses you'll need:

EGO Extolling your greatness is nearly as crucial to rap as it is to talk radio. One consistent theme of Jay-Z's lyrics is the genius of Jay-Z's lyrics. He claims a charisma that is almost mystical and skills on the mic that make him the ''Mike Jordan of recording,'' ''the Bruce Wayne of the game,'' a ''god.''

Rush Limbaugh peppers his show with self-adulating incantations that would seem right at home on a Snoop Dogg track, calling himself ''Chief Waga-Waga El Rushbo of the El Conservo Tribe,'' ''doctor of democracy,'' and ''a weapon of mass instruction.'' Both he and Jay-Z have referred to themselves as ''a living legend.''

HATERS You're nobody in hip-hop until you claim to have hordes of detractors. The paradox, of course, is that the artists who regularly denounce their haters have a huge and adoring audience. How does Lil Wayne complain in song about the legions who seek his ruin even as he dominates the charts? Ask Michael Savage, who is forever describing himself as an underdog, marginalized by the media -- on the more than 300 stations that carry his show.

FEUDS50 Cent vs. Ja Rule. Lil' Kim vs. Foxy Brown. Jay-Z vs. Nas. Every couple of years, one rapper will pick a fight with another and battle it out with the winner typically determined by sales. This will sound familiar to anyone who has followed, say, Bill O'Reilly's broadsides at Mr. Limbaugh (''Walk away from these right-wing liars!'' Mr. O'Reilly said of an unnamed rival, described as someone who smokes a cigar and owns a private jet) or Mark Levin's attack on Mr. O'Reilly. (''He has a fledgling radio show, that has no ratings,'' Mr. Levin said in 2008, ''and he'll be off radio soon because he's a failure.'' Levin's predication came true in January of this year.) Liberal ranters can partake, too, as MSNBC host and fulminator par excellence Keith Olbermann has proven with his long running O'Reilly spat. 