IF you heard Sandy Beall order lunch at a Ruby Tuesday here one recent afternoon, and didn’t know he’s the founder and chief executive of this casual dining chain, you would assume the guy has serious issues with appetite control.

“Bring the New Orleans seafood, bring the herb-crusted tilapia, bring the cheddar burger,” he tells a waitress, in a Tennessee drawl.

“How do you want that cooked?” she asks, scribbling as fast as she can.

“Medium. And bring a rack of ribs.”

“Half or full?”

“Full,” replies Mr. Beall. “The full is prettier.”

All this as waiters whisk away a pile of appetizers that includes a jumbo lump crab cake, guacamole, tortilla chips, a chicken wing sampler, Asian dumplings and the punningly named Thai Phoon shrimp, described on the menu as “the perfect storm of texture and flavors.”

It’s a lot of lunch for two people, especially because Mr. Beall (pronounced “bell”) is hardly going to lift his fork. But he hasn’t ordered this orgy of meat, seafood and sesame peanut glaze because he’s feeling peckish. He has summoned this spread because he’s feeling proud.

For the last two years, Mr. Beall has spent upward of $100 million of his company’s money in a grand, all-consuming campaign to upgrade the brand — its food, its service and, most recently, its décor, which for a long time was dominated by faux Tiffany lamps and rummage-sale bric-a-brac. Now Ruby Tuesday features leather banquettes and dark varnished wood, and the wait staff is clad in hipster black shirts and black pants. The new menu includes upmarket fare, like lobster tails, and offers suggestions about which wine will work with your dish.

“Pairs well with Penfolds Koonunga Hill Shiraz,” it says under a picture of the surf and turf.

The menu is a long way from the burger-and-beer joint that Mr. Beall, then 21, created in 1972 on the campus of the University of Tennessee, where he was a student.

If he’d picked any other moment during his years atop this international empire of 896 restaurants, the makeover might have merely been very hard. But the recession started right about the time that those faux Tiffany lamps were yanked from the ceilings. The chain has been trying to transform itself into the fancier, pricier alternative to much larger rivals like Applebee’s just as consumers have been hoarding their dimes.

Americans eat 20 million meals a week at casual-dining chains, according to Technomic, a restaurant consulting firm — a number second only to fast food.

The companies that gave the world such singular creations as riblet platters, Southwestern egg rolls and dessert shooters stay so keenly attuned to our appetites and urges that you could tell the story of our country’s ever-evolving, slightly twisted love affair with food and commerce with a collection of menus from Chili’s, T.G.I. Friday’s and their ilk.

When Ruby Tuesday began its self-enhancement drive, it hoped merely to join a slightly posher neighborhood, the place where Olive Garden and Outback Steakhouse live. But by commencing just before the bust and sticking to its strategy, the company has become an object lesson in recession-era economics, demonstrating both the perils and possible upsides of pushing lobster in an age of chicken pot pie.

THE company is haunted by the stark metrics of its trade: Ruby Tuesday’s same-store sales are down about 8 percent from last year, when it closed 54 restaurants. With traffic flagging, a war of discounts and specials broke out in the middle of last year, and the chain started offering buy-one-get-one-free deals — a k a “Bogos” — to get customers in the door.

Wall Street began to worry that the company would break its debt covenants, and Ruby Tuesday shares, which traded as high as $33 a few years back, fell to 85 cents in March. A side of the creamy mashed cauliflower cost about three times as much.

Goodbye, Ruby Tuesday?

Not quite.

The stock has rebounded to $6.54, and the company has raised money to pay down debt. Even if a sense of imminent doom has passed, however, nobody is yet calling Mr. Beall’s makeover a success.

The company says that traffic is up in the most recent quarter, but according to Technomic, same-store sales at Chili’s, Applebee’s and Ruby Tuesday have fallen at roughly the same rate, suggesting that diners either haven’t heard about the changes or can’t taste the difference.

“You ask people in surveys why they chose one casual dining chain over the other and they’ll say, ‘because the line was shorter,’ ” says Ron Paul, the president of Technomic. “Ruby’s is trying to break out of that, and Sandy’s point is correct — if and when people decide to go back to casual dining, you need to give them a reason to do it. Based on the numbers, though, Ruby Tuesday has a long ways to go.”