
India's tour of England is a crucial one where winning shouldn't be the sole aim; the team needs to win and also ensure the young players develop.

Before India even sets foot on English soil there are a few positives. They have the rare opportunity to play two first-class games to acclimatise before the first Test, they are touring when the weather is generally warmer and drier and their campaign opens at Lord's, a ground where since 1980, all major teams bar Sri Lanka have beaten England.

However, there are a few things of which India should be wary. Despite the loss of Andrew Flintoff, the England attack has improved since the teams last met in 2005-06 and some of the young batsmen have matured into top-class Test players.

The big improver among the bowlers is Monty Panesar who has gone from being a young left-armer with potential, to an outstanding attacking spinner. And the resurgent left-arm swing bowler Ryan Sidebottom not only gives England more variety in attack, he is also accurate and knows his business, qualities their younger pacemen lack.

Of the batsmen, Kevin Pietersen is now a well-rounded and consistent stroke-maker rather than a dashing young batsman with a rapier blade. In 2006 there was a danger he might take an opponent apart, now it's only a matter of how many times it will happen in a series.

Ian Bell and Alastair Cook have developed into consistent run-makers with few flaws and a healthy appetite for runs. In addition, Matt Prior's successful transition to Test cricket means England now actually have a wicketkeeper who can bat; one with a decent technique, a good temperament and a desire to dominate bowlers that makes him another dangerous stroke-maker to complement Pietersen and (if he returns from injury) Flintoff.

If Flintoff does recover in time to play in this series as a fully-fledged allrounder and Stephen Harmison's resurgence isn't short-lived, then England has an attack to match any in the world. It will contain all the ingredients to trouble a strong batting line-up; pace and bounce (Harmison and Flintoff), right and left-arm swing (Matthew Hoggard and Sidebottom) and the penetrative spin of Panesar. As if that isn't a strong enough arsenal, they also have useful change bowlers in Paul Collingwood and the not-to-be-underestimated right arm-off spin of Pietersen and skipper Michael Vaughan. The only way to improve that combination would be the addition of a good wrist-spinner.

To cap all those attributes, the side is led well by Vaughan and if his knee holds up and their self-belief continues to improve, then England has the wherewithal to seriously challenge Australia in 2009.

That won't concern England much at the moment but beating India will. The West Indies are a sad, shambles of a team and demolishing them only brought minor satisfaction compared with the elation that would follow a comprehensive victory over Rahul Dravid's men.

On paper, Dravid's side is strong in batting but suspect in bowling, particularly the pace department, which is very inexperienced. India's main concern will be what happens if the conditions suit swing and seam bowling?

Despite their experience the senior batsmen (Dravid apart) have shown a dislike for pitches with a tinge of green and this mindset will need to change if they are to overcome the well-balanced England attack. If it doesn't, and the inexperienced Indian fast bowlers also don't adapt, then the tourists will be in for a torrid time.

With the West Indies showing no signs of turning their fortunes around, world cricket badly needs a revitalised Indian side. This tour is the ideal starting point, as many of the senior batsmen won't be around much longer and they need to set an example for the younger players and show them the right path for the future.

This is a fascinating and important tour for India. They come up against a strong and confident England playing at home and a series victory would be a significant achievement for Dravid's men. Victory won't be gained without strong contributions from the younger players and if they succeed it'll mean a lot for India's future.
