While Australia and South Africa do battle for the No. 1 computer ranking, India are being short-changed. They're good enough to rate a mention in such an argument. Australia are rebuilding after the retirements of star players and the joust for top spot should include India. When you choose a very good team from those three sides, India's merits become even more obvious.

The first ingredient in putting together a good team is a strong attack, as winning is only achieved by regularly taking 20 wickets. The two important aspects in selecting a good attack are penetrative new-ball bowlers and variety.

Dale Steyn has evolved into the ideal opening bowler. He operates at a lively pace and swings the ball out to right-handers. He always appears to be bowling within himself and can change pace up - as former star West Indies fast bowler Andy Roberts advocated. If Steyn improves the accuracy of his bouncer, he'll be even more of a handful.

Ishant Sharma is only just behind Steyn as the most promising young quickie in world Cricket, and he would share the new ball with the South African. Sharma is accurate and penetrative, and since he developed the delivery that shapes away from the right-handers, he's become even more dangerous.

At first change the tireless and strong Mitchell Johnson gets the nod. He provides variety with genuine left-arm pace, and he's also productive with the bat and a good athlete in the field. If he ever learns to swing the ball in to right-handers, he'll be a complete bowler.

Spin bowling is not a strong point for either South Africa or Australia. Therefore I'd choose Harbhajan Singh for matches in India and Amit Mishra for contests on harder, more bouncy surfaces.

Just as important as a penetrative new-ball attack is a strong opening combination. India has the perfect dasher in Virender Sehwag, while Graeme Smith just edges out Gautam Gambhir to complete the ideal right- and left-hand combination.

Sehwag is the jewel in India's crown - his presence increases their chances of victory. The glorious win in Chennai over England is a good example, and he makes opposing bowlers and captains extremely nervous. For good measure, he's an excellent change bowler.

Smith is a solid player who makes big scores and runs well between wickets; a must with Sehwag. He can accelerate the scoring-rate when necessary and is also a reliable first-slip fieldsman.

The loss of an early wicket requires a strong character to rebuild from No. 3. A police identikit of the perfect suspect would reveal Ricky Ponting. Technically sound and possessed of a fine temperament, Ponting counter-attacks when lesser batsmen are content to slowly extricate their team from potential danger. He's also a wonderful all-round fieldsman.

Sachin Tendulkar would be the perfect No. 4. The position requires similar attributes to No. 3, and in his heyday Tendulkar was the epitome of a stroke-maker whose technique was solid enough to survive the loss of early wickets. While age has caught up with him, he is still an accomplished run-scorer.		

At No. 5 it's a toss-up between VVS Laxman and Michael Clarke. Both are stroke-makers who can handle pace and spin bowling, but Laxman's expertise as a close catcher gets him the nod. It's no good having excellent bowlers but nobody to hang on to the catches.

Jacques Kallis isn't ideal at No. 6 - he doesn't exude aggressive intent often enough, but he's a solid batsman, a skilful swing bowler, and possesses a safe pair of hands; he's an underrated allrounder.

That only leaves the wicketkeeper and captain, and India provides both. Mahendra Singh Dhoni is a much improved gloveman, a dangerous and thoughtful batsman, and of the three choices the captain with the most imagination. He erred in resorting to an eight-one field placing against Australia in Nagpur last year, but everything else about his leadership has been top-class.

There we have a very well-balanced side; it contains both aggressive and solid batsmen, wicket-taking bowlers who persevere, and an imaginative leader. There are three South Africans, two Australians and six Indians; further proof that Dhoni's side should rate more than a strong mention in any argument about the best team.

The XI:
Virender Sehwag, Graeme Smith, Ricky Ponting, Sachin Tendulkar, VVS Laxman, Jacques Kallis, Mahendra Singh Dhoni, Mitchell Johnson, Harbhajan Singh/Amit Mishra, Dale Steyn, Ishant Sharma 