At the end of the Patriots’ 22-21 loss to the Miami Dolphins on Sunday, New England Coach Bill Belichick was bent over at the waist, looking beaten. It’s rare to see him so whipped, but then, it has been rarer still in this decade to see the Patriots so bereft of personnel and fight, so close to the precipice.

At 7-5, with four winnable games left and a one-game lead, the Patriots are still favored to win the American Football Conference East. But in their glory years, the Patriots would have put the Dolphins and the Jets away weeks ago.

That was then, this is now: every game is a struggle, the Patriots scare nobody, and a deep run in January seems highly unlikely. Most sobering of all, the Patriots are 0-5 at opponents’ stadiums and have lost as many games this season as they did last year with Matt Cassel at quarterback.

A month ago, Belichick made his infamous fourth-and-2 call against the Indianapolis Colts. It may turn out to be the biggest call of the N.F.L. season, not so much for its effect on that game but for its long-term resonance. It let everyone peek at Belichick’s deepest fears about his defense, which have only been validated since then.

Belichick again went for it on fourth down Sunday, instead of kicking a field goal. By now, it is obvious that he is not being aggressive for its own sake but because he believes he has no other option, that the only way the Patriots will win is in a shootout.

He’s right. The Patriots gave back leads of 14 and 11 points Sunday. Their young secondary is struggling to cover: the undersize Jonathan Wilhite (5 feet 9 inches) is being scorched playing cornerback instead of nickel back, which suits him better, and Darius Butler, a rookie, was often a target of the Dolphins. And there is barely the whiff of a pass rush. Listen closely, and you can hear defensive lineman Richard Seymour tsk-tsking from Oakland.

“As a young secondary, you start losing your confidence and aggressiveness,” the former Patriots safety Rodney Harrison said Monday. “For a Bill Belichick-coached team, that’s uncommon to blow coverages and not have communication, because that’s all he teaches.

“When you lose 50 years of experience, it definitely affects you,” said Harrison, now an NBC analyst. “Although people say we weren’t the fastest guys, we played fast enough because we were so experienced. If you don’t have confidence, and you run a 4.4, your 4.4 turns into a 4.5 or a 4.6 because you can’t anticipate, you don’t have instincts.”

Miami entered Sunday’s game ranked 30th in passing. But with one look at film from the Patriots’ games against the Colts and the New Orleans Saints, Dolphins Coach Tony Sparano knew quarterback Chad Henne could do his best Peyton Manning and Drew Brees impersonations. In his ninth start, Henne threw 52 times, more than the Dolphins had in any game in Sparano’s two years as the coach. Miami was particularly successful on third down, converting 53 percent (10 of 19), and also two of three fourth-down chances.

Dolphins players said it was easy. They spread out the Patriots and faced no pass rush. Henne had so much time, he could have gotten to South Beach and back before he had to pass. There was no trickery, no Wildcat. Just a humiliation for what used to be a proud Patriots defense.

“We had our opportunities, we just weren’t able to take advantage of them, numerous times,” Belichick said Monday.

Tom Brady’s calling out his teammates about their fight will receive a lot of attention, and should. But the Patriots have a more fundamental issue to address. Time, inattention and some bad personnel moves have taken a toll on the defense.

Belichick was correctly lauded for plucking players like Wes Welker and Randy Moss from other teams. But he has allowed the cupboard to grow strikingly bare on defense. Harrison and Tedy Bruschi retired. Mike Vrabel and Seymour were sent packing.

The Seymour trade was a calculated move with an eye to the future. The Patriots were not going to re-sign him after this season, and they will have Oakland’s first-round draft pick in return. It is the kind of planning Belichick has made work over and over. But with so much other experience and brainpower leaving, it left the Patriots depleted in the short term.

When Jason Taylor did not join the Patriots, Belichick had to give up two middle-round picks to get defensive end Derrick Burgess, who has two sacks. They signed cornerback Shawn Springs to a three-year contract, and despite the secondary’s dismal play, he has not even suited up in recent weeks.

Early this season, the Patriots were near the top of the league in scoring defense. But when they began to play elite teams like the Colts and the Saints, the lack of experience showed. They have given up seven passing touchdowns in the last two weeks.

Harrison said he thought that performing well in the next four games, albeit against lesser opponents than the Colts and the Saints, would be critical for the psyche of the young defense. The Patriots are unlikely to be a first or second seed, so they will probably host a wild-card game, then, if they win, go on the road.

“You don’t have that experience right now, so they need the next three or four weeks for morale, they need to play well, they need to stop people,” Harrison said. “To the world, they might not have played anyone, but those young guys need that confidence.”

If these are merely growing pains, the Patriots may eventually emerge from them as a strong defense again. If not, the Patriots are in for something as foreign to them as these dispiriting losses: rebuilding.

A Familiar Look

Fans of the Packers and the Jets should have had a powerful moment of recognition Sunday night when Brett Favre sailed two passes down the middle of the field during the Minnesota Vikings’ 30-17 loss to the Arizona Cardinals. Favre’s December meltdowns led to his exile from Green Bay and destroyed the Jets’ 2008 season. Since 2005, he has thrown 15 touchdowns and 33 interceptions in regular-season games from December on.

Now Vikings fans can join the circle of angst. Favre had thrown three interceptions all season, but Arizona’s defensive backs were physical with the Vikings’ receivers and covered the passing routes well.

Favre said that on both of his interceptions, the Cardinals rushed three and dropped eight defenders into coverage. He seemed frustrated: one interception quickly followed a sack that left him annoyed. That led to the poor decision-making that has foiled him in other years. “The better decision would have been not to throw it, at least not there,” Favre said.

Favre looked great beating up on the Detroit Lions, the Seattle Seahawks and the Chicago Bears, but now come the Cincinnati Bengals, whose defense has propelled them to a commanding lead in the A.F.C. North.

Playoff Picture Is Clearer

The Colts can wrap up home-field advantage through the A.F.C. playoffs with a victory over Denver next Sunday. The Saints received a huge break when the Vikings lost, giving the Saints a two-game lead for home field in the National Football Conference.

The rest of the playoff field, though, is murky. For now, the Broncos and the Jacksonville Jaguars would be the A.F.C. wild-card teams, and the Philadelphia Eagles and the Packers would get the spots in the N.F.C. But each conference has six teams within two games of those slots with four games to play, and they include the two most recent champions: the Pittsburgh Steelers (reeling after four losses in a row) and the Giants (rising after beating the Cowboys, with the Eagles on deck).

Tough Decision for Raiders

Bruce Gradkowski is going to make Al Davis’s off-season decisions pretty difficult. He’s 2-1 as Oakland’s starting quarterback, and the Raiders, who had scored 10 offensive touchdowns entering the game, produced three in the fourth quarter against the Steelers. With an uncapped year on deck, Davis could swallow his pride and dump JaMarcus Russell. ... You can dismiss the argument that the Jaguars do not draw crowds because they are not good. The 7-5 Jaguars beat the Houston Texans on Sunday for the fifth straight time at home before a crowd announced at 42,079, the smallest in their history. It’s a good thing the Jaguars are likely to be a wild card and play on the road. 