Forget that Pittsburgh Coach Mike Tomlin may have a fissure to fix in his locker room over the players’ confusion about the decision not to play quarterback Ben Roethlisberger against the Baltimore Ravens. The Steelers’ more difficult job may be fixing their defense.

The most shocking thing about the Steelers’ slump —three losses in a row, to put the defending champions on the brink of missing the playoffs — is that the defense has done the damage. It was especially glaring Sunday night when the defense wasted the backup quarterback Dennis Dixon’s out-of-nowhere effort and surrendered a fourth-quarter lead with a chance to steal an entirely unexpected victory without Roethlisberger.

Of the Steelers’ five losses this season, four of them came after they held a lead in the fourth quarter. That simply does not happen in Pittsburgh, where Dick LeBeau has crafted a merciless defense that last season confounded Ravens quarterback Joe Flacco.

So, what is the problem? Safety Troy Polamalu, who is so talented and instinctive that LeBeau once said he let him move around almost at will, is out with a bad knee. That surely has had an effect on a defense that last season was ranked first in total and pass defense. It is hard to imagine that the Steelers would have yielded four passes for 20 yards or more to Flacco or five passes for 20 yards or more to the Kansas City Chiefs last week if Polamalu was able to play. Would Derrick Mason have been open in the middle of the Steelers’ defense for a 17-yard catch on third-and-22? Would Ray Rice have created a carnival of missed tackles on his fourth-and-5, 44-yard catch-and-run? Probably not.

But the former Indianapolis Colts coach Tony Dungy, who played for the Steelers and is now an analyst on NBC’s “Football Night in America,” said that blaming Polamalu’s absence would be a crutch. “That’s overrated — we played a lot of games without Bob Sanders,” Dungy said of the Colts’ often-injured safety.

A greater problem, Dungy said, is that the Steelers have had a bit of an identity crisis this season, eschewing their traditional mentality of using the run to set up the pass for a pass-heavy attack. “We’re going to be 500 yards of offense,” Dungy said, describing the Steelers’ thinking.

That approach has set up the defense for trouble. With a lead, the offense has struggled to run and eat up the clock as it tries to give the defense rest and limit how long it has to hold off the opposing offense. Against Kansas City, the Steelers attempted 42 passes and ran 31 times. Against Cincinnati, they passed 40 times and ran just 18 times. In their last victory, against Denver, the Steelers were perfectly balanced, with 29 passes and 29 rushes. Not surprisingly, with Roethlisberger out, the offense relied more on the run, with 38 rushes and 26 throws.

“They’re just going through a slump,” Dungy said. “We went through that in our Super Bowl year. You’re not going to play perfect every week, but your hope is you’re playing your best in December. They’re playing all these games in prime time; they’re a red-letter game for everybody. They’re on the road, a night game, the schedule is a little off. Kansas City was waiting for them all year. It’s a combination of scheduling and other teams being ready for them.”

The schedule may start to help the Steelers next week: victories will assuage the players’ frustration, as expressed by Hines Ward on NBC, at not having Roethlisberger against the Ravens. The division title is probably out of reach, but with games against Oakland, Cleveland, Green Bay, Baltimore and Miami, the Steelers can reasonably expect to win four of them, including against Baltimore at home, assuming Roethlisberger returns.

Last year Tomlin quoted Robert Frost as his team went to the Super Bowl, talking about their miles to go before they rested. On Sunday night, Tomlin, the William & Mary graduate, took a darker turn, reaching for Dylan Thomas’s meditation on death, vowing that the Steelers would not go gently. The light is apparently not dying on this season quite yet.

“Don’t talk to me about moral victories and things of that nature,” Tomlin said. “We didn’t get the job done. Everybody that’s around us has the same problems that we have. I just acknowledge that we’re going to be in attack mode.”

Hochuli in Spotlight, Again

Whoops, he did it again. Ed Hochuli, the high-profile official who made headlines last year with his blown call of a Jay Cutler fumble, made a nearly costly error Sunday night.

As the clock wound down in the final minute of regulation in the Steelers-Ravens game, the Ravens were driving when Joe Flacco was sacked and fumbled at Pittsburgh’s 42. The ball was recovered by Baltimore at the Steelers’ 37. The Ravens’ field-goal team then raced onto the field and attempted a 56-yard field goal. Good thing for Hochuli that Billy Cundiff missed because on Monday morning the N.F.L. released a statement acknowledging that the ball should have been spotted at the 42, adding 5 yards to the kick.

The rule book describes the rules pertaining to a fumble by either team after the two-minute warning. Item (c) states that “if the recovery or catch is by a teammate of the player who fumbled, the ball is dead, and the spot of the next snap is the spot of the fumble, or the spot of the recovery if the spot of the recovery is behind the spot of the fumble.”

New Life for the Titans

It is safe to assume Matt Leinart hopes he never sees Vince Young again. Young finished the Tennessee Titans’ 99-yard drive to win the game over Arizona with a fourth-down touchdown pass (the Titans’ third fourth-down conversion of the drive) as time expired — winning the way almost nobody thought he could, with his arm. Young’s presence has spawned a more balanced offense because Coach Jeff Fisher does not want to rely on Young’s arm. Running back Chris Johnson has had six games this season of at least 125 yards rushing, putting him in the company of Eric Dickerson and Earl Campbell. He is on a pace for a 2,000-yard season. And if the Titans beat the Colts on Sunday, they will be back to .500 with wild-card hopes again.

Falcons Playing Survivor

Remember when it seemed that Michael Vick’s return to Atlanta on Sunday would be one of the major story lines of the season? Vick has been virtually invisible with the Eagles, completing three passes for 6 yards and rushing 15 times for 65 yards. With Atlanta’s season hanging by a thread, Matt Ryan dealing with turf toe and Michael Turner having aggravated his high ankle sprain, this game will be much more about the Falcons’ survival than Vick’s.

Favre M.V.P. Talk Heats Up

Another preseason prognostication gone awry: Brett Favre’s arm will fall off. Still waiting? Favre is playing better than he did in his 20s. He has thrown 24 touchdown passes (three Sunday against the feeble Chicago Bears) versus only three interceptions (none on Sunday). That’s an 8-to-1 touchdown-to-interception ratio, the second best in N.F.L. history through 11 games behind Tom Brady, whose ratio was 9.7 to 1 (39 touchdowns, 4 interceptions) in 2007. Favre’s previous best ratio was 3 to 1 (39 touchdowns to 13 interceptions) in 1996, 13 years ago, when he was 27.

If he keeps up the pace, he will have the best ratio in N.F.L. history for a quarterback with at least 20 touchdown passes. Only six quarterbacks have ever had a ratio above 4.0 — Brady is tops at 6.25 in 2007. His off-season dithering was irritating, but Favre may be the league’s most valuable player.

Peterson’s Fumbles

Paging Tiki Barber; Adrian Peterson needs your advice. Peterson may be the best running back in football, but he had two more fumbles Sunday. That made it 15 in the last two seasons, the most by an N.F.L. running back in that time. Barber, a former Giant, lost six fumbles in 2002 and in 2003 until Coach Tom Coughlin taught him to carry the ball vertically instead of horizontally. Peterson’s issue seems more rudimentary: his viselike handshake is legendary, so his grip is not the problem. But he often holds the ball in his right arm, leaving it exposed when he runs to the left side of the field, where both of his fumbles occurred Sunday.

Kubiak Needs a Turnaround

Welcome to the hot seat, Gary Kubiak. Squandering a 17-0 lead in the second quarter to lose to the Colts again is no way to assure the Houston Texans’ owner, Robert McNair, that progress is being made toward the team’s first playoff berth. McNair was bemoaning his team’s inconsistency in October. With Kubiak in his fourth season and the Texans still having trouble closing out games even against an injury-ravaged Colts defense, they need only look in their division to the Titans, who are now tied with the Texans at 5-6, for the N.F.L.’s latest example of a fast turnaround. After this season McNair may want to start one of his own.
