 For most teams, failing to score after an interception and fumble recovery in the end zone on consecutive drives would signal disaster and send everyone home shaking their heads about squandered opportunities. Everyone left Lucas Oil Stadium shaking their heads Sunday night all right, but it was over one of the most confounding coaching decisions imaginable, a stunner by Bill Belichick that gave Peyton Manning a short field to engineer a stunning 35-34 comeback victory.

Belichick has built a storied and championship-laden career on the back of his coaching acumen. But his decision to keep his offense on the field for fourth down needing 2 yards at the Patriots’ 28 yard line with two minutes remaining — and nursing a 6-point lead — may go down as the most ill-fated of his career, and raise as many questions as he has faced at any time since leaving the Cleveland Browns.

“They question everything,” Belichick said under his breath, when asked about the possibility.

The Patriots had held a 17-point lead early in the fourth quarter, but the Colts had scored two touchdowns on two quick drives — they lasted 2:04 and 1:49 — wrapped around a Patriots field goal to close the gap to 6. The Patriots had the ball on their 28, and when a Tom Brady pass fell incomplete on third down, the punt team began to trot on the field. That’s when the Patriots called timeout with 2:08 remaining and Belichick told Brady, “We’re going,” Brady said later.

Belichick had clearly made the decision that his defense would be unable to stop the Colts and Peyton Manning if they got the ball back, and so he would gamble with the ball in the hands of his best players — Brady and the offense. Had the Patriots converted, they probably would have been able to run out the clock, or run it far down, giving the Colts the ball back with a few seconds remaining.

The play was a short pass to the right side to Kevin Faulk, one of the Patriots’ most reliable players. Faulk caught the ball and appeared to pick up the first down, but he also bobbled the ball, and he was not awarded forward progress, leaving the Patriots a yard short and Belichick looking stunned. The Patriots had already used their last timeout, so they could not ask for a replay challenge of the spot of the ball.

“We thought we could win on that play,” Belichick said. “I don’t know how we could not get a yard on that play.”

Reminded that he actually needed two yards, Belichick replied: “One yard, two yards...”

For all the head-scratching that play call will generate — it was already being labeled an indication of Belichickian arrogance and was questioned by the former Colts coach Tony Dungy on national television — Belichick’s calculation was correct. His defense couldn’t stop Manning. He needed just four plays and 1:47 before throwing the winning 1-yard touchdown pass to Reggie Wayne.

”Coach has a lot of confidence we can make a yard and a half to win the game,” Brady said. “They showed us the drive before they can go pretty fast and score. Coach was being aggressive and I love that about him. As a coach, you’re not thinking let’s punt it to them and see if they can do it again. He’s thinking, ‘We have 450 yards of offense.’ ”

Whatever he was thinking, the outcome of the latest installment of this epic rivalry will probably have major playoff implications. The Colts are 9-0 and have the inside track toward home-field advantage through the A.F.C. playoffs. The Cincinnati Bengals, at 7-2 and with an easy schedule remaining, seem headed for a first-round bye. The Patriots are 6-3, and though they still have a firm grip on the A.F.C. East, their chances of a first-round bye are sinking.

Still, in the Patriots locker room, there was no questioning the call.

”He’s the head coach,” Faulk said. “No matter what, to us that’s the right call. We are the employees.”

Manning’s fast-strike magic — he completed 28 of 44 passes for 327 yards and 4 touchdowns — turned what had been a near-blowout into an instant classic, and gave seed to Belichick’s defensive doubts.

But it also obscured a spectacular performance by Brady, who missed last year’s installment of the rivalry with a knee injury. His fourth consecutive 300-yard game was seemingly aided by a curious defensive decision by the Colts to let Patriots receivers run free from the line of scrimmage.

The Colts’ secondary has been weakened by injuries, and the backups who have been thrust into starting roles were clearly outmanned by the Patriots. The tactic was particularly ineffective against Randy Moss, who finished with 179 yards and 2 touchdowns.

Manning had not been Manningesque for most of the game, and after the Colts scored easily on their second possession, they struggled to find their offensive rhythm. Wrapped around a touchdown pass to Reggie Wayne, they had three three-and-out drives in the second quarter, with drives sometimes stymied by drops or poor plays by the young Colts receivers Austin Collie and Pierre Garcon. And when the Colts produced no points on a drive that started with 1:36 in the first half, it seemed a bad omen.

At the end, though, the bad news belonged only to the Patriots. Manning watched it unfold on the sideline with butterflies.

”Not much surprises me with New England,” he said. “When you see them go for it on fourth down, I can’t lie to you, you certainly get a little nervous because you might get a shorter field. But the game might be over.”

Defensive end Dwight Freeney said: “It even happens in video games. You go for it on fourth down when you’re not supposed to and something bad happens.” 