 As the rift between the Denver Broncos' rookie coach, Josh McDaniels, and his star quarterback, Jay Cutler, widened last off-season, more than a few executives in the N.F.L. suggested that McDaniels should make nice with Cutler for the good of the team. But McDaniels, it became clear, had something else in mind, and now we know why.

Cutler, who was traded to the Chicago Bears in April for two first-round picks and quarterback Kyle Orton, was supposed to change the balance of power in the National Football Conference North and make the Bears instant Super Bowl candidates.

The balance of power has shifted all right, up to the Minnesota Vikings and their 40-year-old wonder, Brett Favre, who -- can this really be happening? -- may be having the best season of his indestructible career. The Vikings (9-1) are running away with the division, leaving Green Bay to scramble for a wild-card spot. Left in the dust are the Bears, who, after Sunday night's 24-20 loss to Philadelphia, are 4-6 and all but eliminated from the postseason hunt. That gives them plenty of time to contemplate this question: what is wrong with Cutler?

Cutler has thrown a league-high 18 interceptions, the same number he threw all of last season for the Broncos. It is two more than the Jets rookie Mark Sanchez's total, and he can be excused for the deer-in-the-headlights look. The interception that Cutler threw Sunday night was a tipped ball that killed a potential game-winning drive. That wasn't Cutler's fault, but a near interception earlier in the game -- when he tried to gun a pass to Greg Olsen into triple coverage in the end zone -- was. Even more troublesome was that Cutler overthrew three touch passes that seemed to be certain touchdowns if they were on the money.

Cutler's lack of accuracy on Sunday night, and the 12 interceptions he has thrown in prime-time games, have been confounding. ''He was never as good as everybody said he was,'' the former quarterback Trent Dilfer, now an ESPN analyst, said Monday. ''He has great talent and remarkable upside, but he's a very average player.''

Cutler is coming off a season in which he threw for 4,526 yards. But Dilfer said that any quarterback playing in Denver last year, behind the game's best offensive line, with Brandon Stokley and Eddie Royal to catch the ball and an offensive guru like Mike Shanahan calling the plays, should have been able to throw for 4,000 yards. None of those factors exist in what Dilfer calls Chicago's antiquated offensive system. Dilfer said: ''He's a pick-and-stick passer: he doesn't work through his progressions. He is locked in on his primary receiver and he lets it fly. He hardly ever gets to the No. 3 receiver and he very rarely even gets to No. 2.''

That has been a problem in particular in the red zone, where Cutler has thrown five interceptions this season. Finally, Dilfer said, Cutler's mechanics cause him to fade as he throws the touch pass. Cutler's knees, Dilfer said, face downfield on the touch pass, so that he looks like a guard shooting a fadeaway jumper. Instead, he should plant his left leg and follow through.

''He's had so much statistical success, he's never been broken,'' Dilfer said. ''Like big-time racehorses, you have to break them.''

Consider Cutler and the Bears' season broken.

Routine for the Raiders

It's the peculiar history of the Oakland Raiders that even when something good happens, something bad often follows. So it went Sunday, when the Raiders stunned the Cincinnati Bengals, 20-17, on a closing-seconds field goal. The Raiders' season was over long ago, so this victory over a division leader reflected an admirable level of fight. But they did it with a journeyman quarterback, Bruce Gradkowski, whom even the famed quarterback collector Jon Gruden could do little with in Tampa Bay. (Although Gradkowski credited Gruden after the game with helping him as a rookie.) 