 Schoolchildren are taught to try, try again. Maybe teachers should just show a weekly N.F.L. highlight reel to get the message across. The nine teams that entered Week 11 as the division leaders (Denver and San Diego were tied for first in the American Football Conference West) were a combined 63-18 (.778). That record was 22 wins better than the same nine teams' records from a year ago at this time.

THIS IS DISCIPLINE? Cleveland Coach Eric Mangini insisted last week that the Browns were making progress, and that one of the signs was that they had committed the fewest penalties in the league, after being near the bottom of the league last season. Discipline, Mangini said, would eventually pay off. The Browns are still waiting.

On Sunday, they finally unleashed Brady Quinn to throw downfield (304 yards, 4 touchdowns). It wasn't that they listened to Jon Gruden's criticism of their Monday night game plan against the Ravens so much as the Lions did not have Ed Reed playing deep. Cleveland led the Lions with just a few seconds left in the weekend's most entertaining game.

Then, on what would have been the final play, the Browns committed pass interference on a desperation throw by Matthew Stafford to the end zone. So much for discipline. Since a game cannot end on a defensive penalty, the Lions were given one more snap with no time on the clock, and -- because this may be the worst Browns season since expansion -- the Lions scored, beating the Browns, 38-37.

The good news for beleaguered Browns fans: Cleveland is still in the running for the top overall draft pick next season. The bad news for Mangini: it is hard to imagine he will be around to make the pick after this galling loss.

COWBOYS WIN UGLY Someone is going to win the National Football Conference East, but it is hard to find a team that appears to want to. The Cowboys, who lead by one game, looked horrible Sunday in their 7-6 win over Washington.

Worse, the owner Jerry Jones is giving in to his worst impulses to be the general manager, suggesting publicly that he wanted the ball to go to Felix Jones and Miles Austin more. Jones rushed 10 times, and Austin was thrown seven passes (he caught four). Lucky for the Cowboys they were playing the Redskins, where the Sherm Lewis offensive experiment failed, generating just two field goals.

The Giants are only a game back because they beat the Falcons in overtime after the sagging defense lost a two-touchdown lead in the fourth quarter. The Cowboys' recent history suggests that a late-season meltdown is coming up, which should leave the division up to the Eagles and the Giants.

CALL IT EVEN Slowly, parity is reasserting itself. Six of the early games were within one score late in the fourth quarter. The Chiefs stunned the Steelers in overtime and have won back-to-back games. Kansas City scored 10 points in the fourth quarter to send the game to overtime --Pittsburgh's defense, of all things, is losing games -- but the Steelers are being doomed by special teams, a perennial problem for them. They allowed a kickoff return for a touchdown, the fourth such return against the Steelers in five games.

Pittsburgh caught a break, though, when the 3-7 Raiders stunned the 7-3 Bengals on a field goal in the final seconds, 20-17.

The Dolphins, after starting 0-3, are 5-5 and are in the A.F.C. wild-card race. So are the Jaguars, who lost their first two games and are now 6-4. The Chargers, who routed Denver on Sunday, 32-3, have passed the Broncos in the A.F.C. West, winning five in a row to Denver's four straight losses. The Packers, who have lost twice to division-leading Minnesota, are back in the N.F.C. wild-card race at 6-4. 