Al Sharpton urged the N.F.L. in a letter released Monday to reject the conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh’s potential bid to buy the St. Louis Rams. He also asked for a meeting with N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell.

It was the latest indication of the controversy Limbaugh’s involvement in the bid has caused, months before N.F.L. owners are expected to consider a new ownership group for the Rams.

In his letter, Sharpton, the president of the National Action Network, a civil rights organization, said that the N.F.L. should reject the bid by Limbaugh because he would be bad for the league. Goodell is in Boston, attending owners meetings through Wednesday, and will respond to the letter when he returns, the league spokesman Greg Aiello said.

Limbaugh taped an interview for the “Today” show, to be broadcast Tuesday and Wednesday, in which he said the attention generated by his attempt to buy the Rams showed that his detractors wanted to pigeonhole him.

“They’re just gonna go nuts,” Limbaugh was quoted saying of his detractors in an account of the interview on MSNBC.com. “This is the kind of stuff they’ve been trying to make sure doesn’t happen with me. All this stuff is the mainstreaming of Rush Limbaugh from off this far-right fringe they’ve tried to put me. I just keep tiptoeing into the mainstream. And it just irritates them.”

Limbaugh, a Missouri native who lives in Palm Beach, Fla., is an avid sports fan. He has teamed with Dave Checketts, the principal owner of the St. Louis Blues hockey team and a former Madison Square Garden executive, in making the bid for the Rams. There is no guarantee that their bid would prevail for the 60 percent of the team that is for sale by the family of the former longtime owner Georgia Frontiere, who died in January 2008.

Checketts, in a telephone interview, said: “I have a confidentiality agreement with Goldman Sachs as part of the bid process. I absolutely cannot say anything about any of it.”

Three to six groups are reported to be interested in bidding for the team, which Forbes magazine valued last month at $913 million. Stan Kroenke, who owns the other 40 percent of the team, has the right to match any offer.

The N.F.L. is working with Frontiere’s family, but would not discuss the potential ownership groups or their bids. The sale also raises the question of whether new owners would move the team from St. Louis.

Frontiere’s family has said little. In a statement last week, Chip Rosenbloom, the owner, said: “Our strategic review of our ownership of the Rams continues. We will make an announcement upon the completion of the process.”

The winning bidder would have to be approved by a three-fourths majority of the league’s other 31 owners. The perception is that owners will accept whoever has the deepest pockets, but they may be reluctant to invite a regular source of controversy into their midst.

Last year, when Stanley Druckenmiller, the president of a hedge fund company, tried to buy a controlling interest in the Pittsburgh Steelers by buying up the shares owned by the younger brothers of the team’s chairman, Dan Rooney, Goodell said that the N.F.L. would do everything it could to help Rooney retain control of the team. Druckenmiller withdrew his offer.

Goodell has said nothing about Limbaugh’s bid, although an outcry has built since Limbaugh went public last week with his involvement. Retired and current N.F.L. players, who rarely take an interest in ownership transactions, have said that they would not be interested in playing for a Limbaugh-owned team and that the Rams would have trouble attracting free agents. Roman Oben, a former player who is now the chairman of a town Democratic Party in New Jersey, has been particularly vocal.

“The biggest fear that I share, and a lot of people share with me, is that you just don’t want a guy with these extreme views, who has made a living off those views, getting in the ear of upper management and ownership to create some of these policies,” Oben said in a telephone interview. “If you start letting a guy like Rush Limbaugh in, he would assert himself into one of these committees and he will start to talk about policy. That will affect all N.F.L. players. It’s not a black-and-white thing.”

The players’ opposition to Limbaugh is rooted largely in his comments about race. The most famous of those came when he spoke about Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb in 2003, while Limbaugh worked for ESPN.

“The media has been very desirous that a black quarterback do well,” Limbaugh said during a broadcast then. “There is a little hope invested in McNabb, and he got a lot of credit for the performance of this team that he didn’t deserve.”

Not surprisingly, McNabb said last week that he would not play for the Rams if Limbaugh were the owner. And over the weekend, the executive director of the players union, DeMaurice Smith, sent an e-mail message to the union’s executive committee in which he expressed his concern about Limbaugh and encouraged players to speak their minds. The union spokesman George Atallah said Monday that Smith’s message should not be construed as union opposition to Limbaugh, because it has no role in the ownership process.

“I think it’s safe to characterize it that he realizes he’s a polarizing figure and it would be better if he weren’t part of that group,” Atallah said.
