Forget the Barry Switzer references. Yes, Bozo the Coach, which is what The New York Post called Switzer in a headline in 1995 when his Dallas Cowboys failed to convert a fourth-down attempt at their 29 against the Eagles, made the same decision that Bill Belichick did Sunday night in New England’s 35-34 loss to Indianapolis.

Quarterback Tom Brady of the New England Patriots spoke to head coach Bill Belichick in the fourth quarter of their game against the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday in Indianapolis, Ind.
Kevin Faulk appeared to pick up a first down on the Patriots' fourth-down attempt late in the fourth quarter, but he bobbled the ball, and he was not awarded forward progress.

As second-guessing continues to rage about Belichick’s stunning decision to try to convert on fourth-and-2 at his own 28 while leading, 34-28, with quarterback Peyton Manning waiting on the opposite sideline, the best point of comparison may be Belichick himself earlier this season.

Against Atlanta on Sept. 27, Belichick went for it on fourth-and-1 from his own 24. The Patriots converted. Belichick was hailed for his you-play-to-win-the-game moxie. And in his postgame comments, he sounded strikingly the way he did Sunday night, if a lot more jovial. “I felt like we could get a yard,” he said that day. “There would have been plenty of criticism if we didn’t. But then we were able to get that and basically hold on to the ball.”

That’s exactly what Belichick was trying to do Sunday, but Kevin Faulk caught the ball short of a first down. The differences, of course, were substantial. The Patriots were leading when Belichick made his gambit against Atlanta, too. But it was only the third quarter. There was plenty of time to recover. And with all due respect to Matt Ryan, it was not Manning who was preparing to take over if the Patriots came up short.

But the Patriots’ offense was struggling for consistency at the time, so the decision to hand off to Sammy Morris seemed outrageous then, too. It worked: the Patriots held the ball for almost the rest of the third quarter, kicked a field goal and packed the game away. Which is why you haven’t heard much more about it until now. The Patriots, by the way, are 17th in the N.F.L. in fourth-down efficiency. They have gone for it 11 times on fourth down and converted 5 times.

“Bill obviously has more faith in the ability of his offense to get a yard than for his defense to keep Manning and the Colts from orchestrating a two-minute drive,” the former Ravens coach Brian Billick said. “No one knows his team better than Bill. I do wonder what message it sends to the defensive players.”

Rodney Harrison, a former Patriots safety, was more succinct on NBC late Sunday night. “The worst coaching decision I’ve ever seen Bill Belichick make,” he said.

Probably. But Belichick, who has long embraced different approaches to managing a game, makes plenty of unconventional decisions, one reason he is widely regarded as the best tactician in the game. He is also one of the few coaches with the standing and thick skin not to care about the second-guessing that inevitably follows such decisions.

In 2003, he took an intentional safety to change field position against Denver, and the Patriots won. He routinely tries 2-point conversions earlier in games than most coaches. And last week, against Miami, the Patriots nearly went for it on fourth-and-1 from the Dolphins’ 18 with 1 minute 14 seconds remaining. The Patriots led by 7, so if the Patriots did not convert, Miami would have gotten the ball with a chance to tie.

The circumstances were much different — the Dolphins would have had bad field position and Chad Henne isn’t Manning, either — but these decisions provide a window into Belichick’s thinking. He wants to put away the game immediately when the Patriots have a chance, particularly when he has his best player, Tom Brady, on the field. The Patriots had blown two earlier opportunities to put the game out of reach by turning the ball over in the end zone. Perhaps that American Football Conference championship loss after the 2006 season, in which the Colts rallied from 18 points down and informed the Patriots’ “put your foot on their throat and keep it there” philosophy in 2007, is still an influence.

The Patriots were saved from themselves last week when offensive lineman Stephen Neal jumped offside, scuttling the plans. No such luck for the Patriots on Sunday night. But the Patriots have been as successful as they have been in large part because of Belichick’s outside-the-box thinking. He simply overplayed his hand, and it cost the Patriots a victory in a game they largely dominated.

Belichick’s miscalculation obscured a few essential facts about the game.

He was right in thinking his defense was gassed and would probably not have stopped Manning no matter where the drive started. The Patriots had just allowed two 79-yard touchdown drives that took about two minutes each in the fourth quarter. Right or wrong, Belichick decided the Patriots would win or lose with the ball in Brady’s hands, a conventional approach and often a good bet.

The Colts’ defense has issues. Brady completed 29 of 42 passes for 375 yards and 3 touchdowns. The injury-depleted secondary had particular trouble covering Randy Moss, who was frequently untouched coming off the line of scrimmage. And the Patriots exposed a real problem for the aggressive outside pass rush of Dwight Freeney and Robert Mathis — the draw play run to the right caught the Colts overpursuing (Faulk had 12 rushes for 79 yards).

Manning is the best quick-strike scoring threat in N.F.L. history. The Colts’ offense was mediocre for much of the night, generating 251 yards through three quarters. Manning got little help from his young receivers. He threw 11 times to Pierre Garcon, who caught only three. Austin Collie dropped one pass. But Manning generated 21 points in the fourth quarter while holding the ball for less than six minutes total. He was 9 of 11 for 119 yards in that quarter. Now you know why Belichick did not want to punt to him again.

Two things are certain: Belichick’s genius credentials are going to take a bruising this week. And it will all be compelling prologue if — when? — these teams meet in the A.F.C. championship two months from now.
