 The Dallas Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones, clenched his teeth tightly and strode into his locker room so abruptly Sunday night that he didn’t even hold the door for his son, who was a half-step behind. Jones had issued his warning shot last week when he said that a strong finish and a home playoff game would help Wade Phillips’s chances of surviving as coach.

So much for that motivational trick. Perhaps the Cowboys will somehow survive this December to save their season and a few careers — Jones’s comments suggest a deep playoff run would be required — but with a brutal stretch run ahead, the Giants were supposed to be among their easiest prey, especially on a day when they didn’t intercept Tony Romo even once.

But a total team implosion — Romo’s statistics might be generously called fantasy statistics, as in flashy but not telling the full story — led to a 31-24 loss to the Giants and to the brink of another December debacle. The Cowboys have not lost consecutive games this season, but with the Chargers, the Saints, the Redskins and the Eagles ahead, it is conceivable that the Cowboys (8-4) will lose the rest of the way and miss the playoffs. The Eagles tied them Sunday for the National Football Conference East lead, and the Giants, 7-5 with the victory, have rejoined the race just one game back.

After the game, Phillips kept saying that the Cowboys did things they did not usually do. They gave up big plays. They didn’t convert on third down. They made mistakes in coverage.

“We haven’t been doing those things,” Phillips said, shaking his head.

They also haven’t been winning in December, which was why Phillips’s job was on the line in the first place. The Cowboys have not had a winning record in December and January since 1996 — that’s Cleveland and Detroit territory — and in recent years much of the blame has rested with Romo, whose quarterback rating during those months hovers in Tim Couch territory.

On one of the biggest plays of Sunday’s game, Romo overthrew a wide-open Roy Williams by at least 5 yards on a pass down the sideline that would have pulled the Cowboys to a touchdown behind with four minutes remaining. Romo said he was disappointed as soon as he released the ball because he realized Williams would have walked in.

But if there was a glimmer of good news, it was that Romo was not entirely to blame for this loss. The running game averaged 2 yards a carry, incredibly poor considering how porous the Giants were against the run in the teams’ first meeting this season. The defense gave up 337 yards, lost a 10-point lead in three minutes and made Brandon Jacobs look like Chris Johnson on a 74-yard catch-and-run down the left sideline. The special teams were also a disaster, missing a 42-yard field-goal attempt and allowing a 79-yard punt return for a score. It goes on and on for the Cowboys, who now will face two of the league’s most explosive offenses — the Chargers and the Saints — in consecutive games.

Phillips is a likeable sort and he had a point last week when he noted that he did not receive the respect he deserved for averaging 10 wins a season with the Cowboys. When Jones kept him instead of firing him last January, he insisted that Phillips change a few things. Maybe Phillips has — he has been vague on the subject — but one thing has not changed: Phillips’s soft touch doesn’t engender much confidence that he can stop a skid, especially a psychological one, that threatens to engulf the Cowboys.

“We address the next game, who we’re playing and try to do our best to win the ballgame,” Phillips said. “I don’t think it’s a mental block. I think it’s something you made up. You said something about Tony hadn’t lost a game in November. Well, we lost one in November. We’ll see what happens with this football team and that’s what we’ve got to do. We can change whatever and we’re going to come out next week and try to do that.

“It’s something that you can do it with all kinds of stats,” Phillips continued. “The final season record is what’s most important every year.”

That sounds strikingly like what Phillips said last week, before the Cowboys began their latest winter hibernation. Jason Witten sounded a little more realistic about the slow slide into oblivion the Cowboys face again.

“We can’t allow that to creep up on us,” he said. “We’re too talented for that, too good for that. We’ve got to step up now and do something about it. We’re at a critical point. We can’t let this thing turn. We did today. We have to get back to it and forget all this December stuff. I’m not trying to avoid it or say it’s not true. We’ve got to put it away. You let another one slip and you’re really in trouble.”

They may already be. The Cowboys spent a lot of time last week talking about how they wanted to put the Giants away for good so that, as linebacker Bradie James put it, they would not come back to haunt them. Maybe the Cowboys won’t have to worry about the Giants again. Perhaps because instead they’ll be worrying about another coaching search.