The pre-draft scouting reports on the Minnesota Vikings’ sublime running back Adrian Peterson noted his willingness to drop his head and shoulder to blast through a defender. That’s a plus in football, when extra inches can mean the difference between a first down and failure.

But early this season, when Peterson ran around left end against the Detroit Lions, and saw safety Louis Delmas poised to go low to tackle him near the sideline, Peterson lowered his shoulder and head a little more than a foot off the ground. It produced a brutal hit on Delmas’s helmet and showed Peterson’s willingness to deliver a blow. Looking dangerous even to the naked eye, the collision may also have provided celluloid rationale for the N.F.L.’s preliminary conversations about whether to prohibit running backs from lowering their helmets into defenders.

The discussion of a rule that would ban a style of running is in its infancy, said Rich McKay, the co-chairman of the N.F.L.’s competition committee, but the idea raises questions about how far the N.F.L. can go in the name of player safety before it fundamentally alters the nature of football.

“I think it’s insane to tell a runner you can’t lower your head,” Peterson said Thursday in a telephone interview. “We’ve got 11 guys coming at us, ankles and legs, back. You get really beat up. For me, that’s one way I put the boom on them, to try to make those guys think twice before they hit me again.”

Running backs are taught since Pop Warner days to lower their heads and shoulders — to essentially curl their upper bodies into a ball — to protect their torsos and to limit the area a defender can hit. That position can aid the runner in gaining more yards if his uses his head as a battering ram. The technique is particularly useful for players who rely on strength, not speed, to gain yards. In one legendary play in 1987, Raiders running back Bo Jackson lowered his head and shoulder into Seahawks linebacker Brian Bosworth, pushing him backward into the end zone.

Many players are cautious and skeptical about rules changes that would affect players’ safety. Peterson, among others, questions the many rules insulating quarterbacks. And earlier this week, Steelers receiver Hines Ward gave voice to many players’ ambivalence about how concussions are handled when he said he was frustrated Ben Roethlisberger did not play Sunday night against the Ravens, even though he had post-concussion symptoms. Not surprisingly, the suggestion that a rule prohibiting running backs from lowering their heads to hit with the crown of the helmet prompted some rushers to call it “ridiculous” and “crazy.”

“At the end of the day you want your commodity on the field,” the former Steelers running back Jerome Bettis said. “But you have to let those football players play football. If you continue to try to limit and control how the game is played from a rules standpoint, then ultimately you affect the game itself. It’s no longer true football.”

N.F.L. officials spend months, sometimes years, debating rules changes. They study injury statistics to determine how many players are hurt because of a technique that might be banned. They watch hours of film to determine how a new penalty would be officiated. They ask if a revised technique could be coached. When the three-man wedge on kickoff returns was banned for safety reasons, the N.F.L. heard from special-teams coaches and players who worried that it would limit kickoff returns dramatically; others said it should be banned because it was dangerous. McKay said that kickoff return yardage is up from last season. The message: athletes have such exquisite control of their bodies and N.F.L. coaching is so good, that players can adjust to anything.

“You will hear sometimes people say, ‘You’re going to change the way the game is played,’ ” McKay said. “All those things are fine and need to be considered, but at the end, player safety has to carry the day. The game will be fine, but you’ve got to be sure you get it right.”

In the case of a running backs rule, the N.F.L. would also have to determine where on the field the penalty could be called — could the league really prohibit a running back from lowering his head in the crowd near the line of scrimmage, or would it be prohibited only in the open field? And how would officials determine if a player lowered his head to protect himself or to use it as a battering ram?

“What do you tell the player?” said Charley Casserly, a former N.F.L. general manager and a member of the competition committee. “You always have to give the player the alternate. Let’s get to the practical application here.”

For that, the N.F.L. could seek input from the N.C.A.A., which has a rule that says no player should initiate contact or target the opponent with the crown of his helmet. That rule tries to address the intent of a player, a murky area that the N.F.L. is likely to avoid to make a rule clearer for officials.

According to Rogers Redding, the secretary-rules editor of the N.C.A.A. rules committee, college coaches — who unlike their N.F.L. counterparts vote on rules changes — have resisted a rule addressing whether a running back can lower his head and hit with the top of the helmet. In part, that’s because running backs are not considered defenseless players like wide receivers who are stretched to make a catch or quarterbacks who have planted their leg in the pocket.

“There’s always going to be a strong tension between ‘it’s a hard contact sport’ and player safety,” Redding said. “We struggle with it all the time. Any play you look at there is always the school of thought saying that’s good, hard football. The game is intended to be a rough contact sport. You want to protect the player, but you also want to preserve the game.”

Peterson agrees. He is a fan of the rule that prohibits the horse-collar tackle, but when he compares the game, with its flurry of player safety rules, to the way it was played 15 years ago, he said, “You might as well make it flag football.”

Still, Peterson says he tries to keep his neck out of awkward positions when he lowers his head, because he knows it is dangerous.

Bettis admits that there were times he felt woozy after smashing headfirst into a defender. It was a fair trade-off, he figured, for being able to protect himself from body blows.

“You understood that was part of the game,” Bettis said. “That ding, that was always there.”

But perhaps not as often if a new rule were in place.
