N.F.L. owners are prepared to end a small sliver of revenue sharing that helps shore up the league’s lowest-revenue teams.

The owners informed the players union that starting with the next league year in March — which would be the start of an uncapped season if no new collective bargaining agreement is reached — owners will not share a $100 million fund. Nine teams at the bottom of the revenue pecking order drew from that pool this season.

The $100 million represents a tiny fraction of the $6.5 billion — much of it money generated from television contracts — that all 32 teams share. The decision was first reported by ESPN on Sunday.

The players union plans to fight the move before a special master because it contends that the collective bargaining agreement gives it the right to approve or challenge any changes to the revenue-sharing model. The players union is concerned that even the loss of a relatively small amount of money could imperil the competitiveness of smaller-market teams like Jacksonville, Cincinnati and Arizona.

“Revenue sharing helps maintain the ‘any given Sunday’ dynamic in the N.F.L.,” the players union spokesman George Atallah said. “The amount of money some owners propose to pull out of the system in 2011 could mean the difference between playoffs and blackouts for many teams.”

Not so, says management. It seems nearly certain that no deal will be reached to avert an uncapped year and a management executive said the supplemental revenue sharing applied only to capped seasons. Management claims that the special rules set out to govern an uncapped season should maintain competitive balance even without the supplemental revenue sharing.

Among those rules: there will be no salary minimum; players become unrestricted free agents after six years, not four; each team gets an additional transition tag; and the final eight playoff teams can sign free agents only to replace the ones they lose. Still, the move is sure to cost some players money. Without a salary floor, typically low-spending and low-revenue teams will spend little.

“We are simply going forward on the terms the union approved in March of 2006,” the league spokesman Greg Aiello said.

Aiello continued: “The union is just trying to make noise to get some attention. The C.B.A. has special rules to protect competitive balance in the uncapped year. There will still be billions in equally shared revenue in 2010.”