The Dallas Cowboys would seem to be singularly suited for success during the holiday season. The Christmas trees in their training complex are festooned in blue and silver with giant sparkly stars dangling from the branches, as if a pine forest were clad in Cowboys jerseys like the rest of North Texas.


But instead of good cheer, December evokes only shivers around here. Years of late-season failings have become as grating as a loop of Christmas music at the mall. The Cowboys are 15-26 in regular-season games in December and January this decade, putting them in a league with Cleveland, Detroit and Oakland. Coach Wade Phillips took his first question about December when training camp opened in July.

The calendar has turned again, and the Cowboys (8-3, with a one-game lead in the National Football Conference East) are preparing for a brutal stretch run that begins on the road Sunday against the Giants. Jerry Jones, the Cowboys’ owner, mentioned that a strong finish and a good playoff seeding would help Phillips’s chances of keeping his job. That prompted Phillips to say that he does not get the respect he deserves for averaging 10 victories in his first three seasons with the Cowboys.

The Cowboys have not had a winning record in December and January in 13 years. The last few years have been dismal: an early playoff loss as the top seed to the Giants in 2007, a 1-3 record and a blowout loss to the Philadelphia Eagles to miss the 2008 postseason.

The fallout is pervasive. Phillips’s job is in jeopardy. The offensive coordinator, Jason Garrett, at one time such a hot head-coaching prospect that Jones gave him millions to stay, could be on the chopping block, too, especially if the Cowboys struggle to score. They totaled two touchdowns in the two games before a 24-7 Thanksgiving victory over Oakland. Quarterback Tony Romo has been given the dreaded “can’t win the big one” tag.

“I don’t know that that’s a perception,” Romo said last week. “Maybe for you it is. I don’t care. I think we’ve played plenty of big games and won plenty of them.”

Maybe that depends on the definition of big. N.F.L. coaches divide the season into segments. The former Steelers coach Bill Cowher said coaches want their teams in a groove for the last six games and starting to peak.

Romo has done the opposite. According to an analysis by The Dallas Morning News, his December quarterback rating is 71.9, just a shade better than Tim Couch’s was in five seasons with Cleveland. But Romo’s rating is also 2 points better than that of the Giants’ Eli Manning, who has won a Super Bowl.

An indication of how his past looms over his present, Romo’s one-day trip to Las Vegas — with his new best-friend-forever receiver Miles Austin — evoked comparisons to his bye-week jaunt to Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, that preceded the Cowboys’ 2007 playoff fiasco. The good news: Jessica Simpson was nowhere in sight.

Maybe that is a sign that it really will be different this time around. When Jones told Phillips that he was going to be retained after last season, he also told him to make changes. Phillips has been vague about what they are, other than saying he is resting veterans more to keep them fresh.

Phillips is never going to be a stern taskmaster. But after giving his players time off after Thanksgiving, he had them practice in pads last Wednesday, an unusual move this late in the season that many players embraced. Phillips said he wanted players to get their timing back after a long layoff, particularly because the schedule (against opponents who are a combined 35-20) presages lots of physical games, with three N.F.C. East opponents and the division leaders San Diego and New Orleans.

“I’ve talked to them about this game, that’s all,” Phillips said. “I don’t think the big picture is as important as the immediate picture. You can’t play five games at once. You can just play one, and this one is really important.”

Most players have embraced Phillips’s hear-no-evil public approach to December, although they also say it is a source of locker room conversation. Receiver Roy Williams invoked the Arizona Cardinals — how times have changed — as an example of a team that can change its fortunes and reputation by heating up at the right time.

Only linebacker Bradie James broke from the script last week, opening his session with reporters with a long soliloquy on the Cowboys’ dislike of the Giants and their need to break through in December. The former running back Tony Dorsett had told James that during his playing days, there was a belief that the Cowboys could not win when they wore blue jerseys. The only way to put that behind them was to win in the blue jerseys, Dorsett told James.

“I can’t downplay it because I’ve been here,” James said. “We need to right the wrong as far as December. I think it’s more of a psychological thing. You don’t want to think about it while you’re out there on the field if something is going wrong. In order to get out of the funk, you need to continue to push forward.”

The atmosphere is certainly different than it was last year, when the Cowboys endured injuries to Romo and running back Felix Jones, among others, and Terrell Owens’s public petulance about his role in the offense.

This Thanksgiving, Jones shed his knee brace and ran with a burst he had not shown in weeks. That provided hope that the ground game might relieve some of the burden on Romo, especially against a Giants defense that allowed 251 yards rushing but intercepted Romo three times in the Cowboys’ Week 2 loss. In the locker room last week, there were also subtle suggestions that the angst of recent years — read Owens — was gone.

“This feels a lot different,” linebacker DeMarcus Ware said. “Just guys feel a lot more comfortable. They feel a part of the team.”

Perhaps that will be enough to catapult the Cowboys into the company they would prefer. They have the most over-the-top stadium in the United States and the most recognizable brand in football. But the Cowboys are striving for the sort of late-season heroics of glamour-devoid and headline-averse teams like New England, Pittsburgh and Indianapolis. Those teams have Christmas trees too, but their lights do not dim at this time of year.

“I love December,” tight end Martellus Bennett said. “I just want to play football and enjoy Christmas.”