The parent company of United Airlines, the UAL Corporation, reported a $537 million loss in the first quarter on Tuesday, bigger than expected, as a 51 percent increase in fuel costs overwhelmed furious efforts to raise fares at the country’s second-largest carrier.

UAL shares closed down $7.88, to $13.55.

Unless oil prices unexpectedly retreat, there is no relief in sight for airlines, and nearly the entire industry is expected to lose money this year.

United, based in Chicago, plans to reduce employment by 1,100 by the end of the year, as airlines begin a new round of layoffs. United increased the number of planes it plans to shed to 30, from an earlier estimate of 15 to 20, in hopes of constraining capacity and driving fares up further.

JetBlue Airways and AirTran Holdings, two formerly fast-growing discount carriers, also posted first-quarter losses. JetBlue, which operates from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, reduced its growth plans for the year, hoping to keep raising fares.

And AirTran, operating from Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport in Atlanta, said it would delay growth plans in the 16 months beginning in September. That move could help it raise fares and conserve cash.

AirTran, where shares have fallen in the wake of bankruptcy filings by some smaller carriers, said it would sell notes and stock to raise about $110 million and bolster its cushion against the downturn.

But the share sale, after the stock has already fallen, will dilute existing shareholders. AirTran shares fell 95 cents, to $3.61.

With a recent rash of bankruptcies at smaller airlines and expected losses at every big carrier but Southwest Airlines, the industry has swiftly entered a steep decline because of oil priced above $100 a barrel and the inability to pass on those higher costs to price-sensitive travelers.

The entire industry is now focused on constraining capacity and raising fares. AirTran managed a 5.2 percent increase in its average fare, to $99.06 during the quarter, as it expanded its capacity by 10.8 percent.

JetBlue did better, its average fare rising 22.4 percent to $135.64 compared with a year earlier, even as its capacity expanded by almost 14 percent. But now it is hunkering down, planning to increase overall capacity by 3 to 5 percent in 2008.

The slowing economy will make fare increases more difficult. Demand for travel typically falls after a recession has started. To date, airlines have not seen a significant decline in demand.

At United, first-quarter fares rose more than 11 percent over the year-ago period, as the carrier reduced domestic capacity by about 6 percent. That sent revenue up 7.7 percent to $4.71 billion for the quarter.

But a $534 million increase in fuel costs, to $1.58 billion for the quarter, led to a loss. The company has $2.9 billion of unrestricted cash and short-term investments, a slimmer cushion than the $3.6 billion it held Dec. 31, 2007.

Of the planned employee cuts, 500 would be managers and 600 union-represented workers, Glenn Tilton, United’s chief executive, said in a recorded message to his workers. “In this extraordinary environment, we recognize the pace of change needs to accelerate,” he said.

United hopes to merge with another airline — Continental Airlines and US Airways are leading candidates — in order to compete against the proposed combination of Delta Air Lines and Northwest Airlines. Tuesday, in his message to workers, Mr. Tilton called industry consolidation “one of the changes required to address the gap between where we stand today and profitability and sustainability.”