Months after thousands of passengers were stranded for hours on airport runways last winter, airlines still have not agreed on how many hours confined passengers would have to wait before they can demand to be released from a plane, the Transportation Department’s inspector general has found.

But in a report delivered to Mary E. Peters, the transportation secretary, the inspector general’s office stopped short of recommending a time limit itself, prompting one passengers’ advocate to describe the report as “weak.”

The inspector general, Calvin L. Scovel III, found that some airlines — like Delta Air Lines and US Airways — have no formal commitment to allow passengers off a stranded plane.

Other airlines do commit to release passengers, after waits of two to five hours. Some also have committed to bring food and water out to the plane, but the waiting time varies from one to three hours, as the industry has failed to adopt a standard for what constitutes an excessive delay.

“We think it is unlikely that passengers’ definition of an extended period of time will vary depending upon which airline they are flying,” the inspector general noted in the report, suggesting that the industry adopt a consistent approach.

The inspector general concluded that two highly publicized recent episodes of stranded passengers — by AMR’s American Airlines and JetBlue Airways last winter — occurred because the airlines lacked a comprehensive plan to avoid or minimize such delays.

Bad weather was at the root of the problems, which stranded thousands and prompted calls for stricter airline regulation. But the airlines’ own actions made things worse, the report said. Some passengers were stuck on planes for more than eight hours.

Essentially, Mr. Scovel’s examination found that not much has changed in the airline industry’s approach to stranded passengers since 1999, when Northwest Airlines stranded passengers for long hours on a snowy Detroit runway.

Airlines successfully lobbied at that time to be allowed to solve the problem themselves. But in many instances, airlines did not follow through, Mr. Scovel said in the report, and they were still ill-prepared to get passengers off planes last winter.

In December, 67 American Airlines planes sat on runways for three hours or more. In February, 9 JetBlue flights sat for six hours or more.

This June was the worst month since 2000 for stranded flights, according to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, which counted 462 flights taxiing out and being stuck on runways for more than three hours.

Moreover, officials acknowledge those figures do not capture the full extent of the problem because diverted and canceled flights are not included.

Still, the inspector general stopped short of suggesting a time limit to confinement on a stranded plane.. “We did not make a specific recommendation,” said Madeline Chulumovich, a spokeswoman for the inspector general. Mr. Scovel declined to elaborate on the report.

Paul Hudson, who heads the Aviation Consumer Action Project, which is affiliated with Ralph Nader, said the inspector general’s office “did a reasonably good job investigating the problem.”

However, he added, “the recommendations are as weak-to-nonexistent as ever. There is no mention of the word ‘rights.’”

With jets more crowded than ever, and the air traffic control system overwhelmed in places, “you’re going to see the problem worsen,” Mr. Hudson said.

A House subcommittee is scheduled to conduct a hearing today on flight delays and other problems in customer service. Mr. Scovel is scheduled to appear, along with other transportation officials, industry representatives and passenger advocates.

As part of other legislation, the House has adopted what proponents call a passengers’ bill of rights, requiring that food and water and usable lavatories be provided to stranded passengers.

Although advocates had lobbied for a three-hour limit, the legislation also stops short of requiring airlines to allow passengers off the plane after a certain number of hours. Instead, it requires airlines to adopt specific plans for such instances and to disclose those plans to the Transportation Department.

James May, president of the Air Transport Association, the airlines’ lobbying group, in testimony prepared for today’s hearing that was released by his office, reiterated his group’s opposition to any time limit for stranded fliers. “Imposing an arbitrary time frame to deplane passengers will have numerous unintended consequences that are likely to increase cancellations and cause even greater delays,” his testimony said.

The inspector general recommended that the industry adopt a uniform time limit for keeping stranded passengers on planes and a time frame for bringing fresh supplies aboard.

He also said the industry needed to establish specific targets to reduce chronically delayed flights and to disclose to ticket buyers the on-time performance of flights. His report called for airlines, airports and regulators to work together to avoid stranded flights.