The Transportation Department said yesterday that it was investigating several domestic airlines for publishing unrealistic flight schedules — including ones that list arrival times the carriers know they cannot achieve — and said as many as eight could be fined for failing to provide accurate flight-delay information.

The agency is under pressure from Congress to force airlines to improve service after recent episodes where several carriers, most notably American Airlines and JetBlue Airways, stranded passengers for hours on airport runways.

The actions disclosed Friday do not deal directly with the issue of stranding on runways, which is being reviewed by the agency’s inspector general; a report is expected shortly after June 30.

Rather, these actions aim at airlines that list unrealistic flight times and fail to disclose to customers, when asked, the on-time performance of particular flights, which is required.

A Transportation Department spokesman with knowledge of the situation, who asked not to be identified, said the agency called airlines 160 times and asked for delay information on particular flights. The airline reservation centers failed to disclose the statistic on 41 percent of the calls, the spokesman said. He would not name the airlines involved.

As the busy and usually storm-plagued summer travel season approaches, with airline employment cut deeply because of recent financial problems and flights mostly full, delays are expected to increase.

Airlines want to be left alone to deal with the problems, and the Transportation Department has thus far mostly agreed with that approach. But some in Congress feel otherwise.

“I was pretty exasperated,” Representative James L. Oberstar, a Minnesota Democrat and chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, said yesterday after a hearing on airline delays. “They don’t learn from each other,” he said, noting that a 1999 instance of passengers being stranded on a runway by Northwest Airlines had brought promises of improved procedures.

Mr. Oberstar wants a bigger staff at the Transportation Department to investigate complaints and more severe fines for violations.

Some flights are chronically late.

In February, for instance, US Airways Flight No. 154 from Philadelphia to San Francisco arrived late 15 minutes or more 100 percent of the time, and the delay averaged 61 minutes, the Transportation Department reported.

The department listed 143 flights in February that were 15 minutes or more late 80 percent or more of the time. 