Southwest Airlines, combing through its maintenance files after being fined $10.2 million last week for an inspection lapse uncovered in 2007, said it found another problem and grounded 38 planes Wednesday, canceling about 125 flights.

Southwest Airlines grounded 38 Boeing 737 planes Wednesday, canceling about 125 flights and causing problems for some passengers at Salt Lake City International Airport.

The planes, all Boeing 737s, were being inspected quickly and returned to service; half of them were back Wednesday afternoon, and the rest were expected to be flying Thursday.

But the episode raises further questions about Southwest’s maintenance procedures and about oversight by the Federal Aviation Administration.

The F.A.A. proposed the fine, a record, against Southwest last week because the carrier had continued for months to operate 46 older 737s that it had failed to inspect as required. Southwest also kept on flying the planes even after it realized it had missed a deadline. The agency termed those flights “deliberate violations.”

The inspections were aimed at finding cracks in aging planes. Subsequent checks identified cracks on six planes, which were fixed. Southwest has a fleet of 523 Boeing 737s.

After the F.A.A. announced its fine, James L. Oberstar, Democrat of Minnesota and chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, released documents indicating an F.A.A. official had signed off on letting Southwest fly the planes after the maintenance lapse was reported.

In a statement issued by the House panel Wednesday, Mr. Oberstar said that if the F.A.A. had investigated Southwest’s maintenance records last year, when the initial lapse was discovered, this latest problem would have been found, too. “F.A.A. should have immediately undertaken a review,” he said.

The F.A.A. called 88 regional safety and inspection managers to Washington for a meeting on Tuesday to “make sure all carriers receive the kind of intensified scrutiny we’re looking at, at Southwest,” said Laura J. Brown, an F.A.A. spokeswoman. At Southwest, she added, “at least one F.A.A. inspector looked the other way. That’s wrong and inexcusable.”

The latest problem involves inspections for cracks on fuselage areas surrounding windows. A Southwest spokeswoman, Brandy King, said the inspections were done in a timely manner, but a review of records Tuesday night left Southwest wondering whether it had performed the work properly.

Some inspection was to be done visually and some using an eddy current, an electrical process used to examine metal structures without tearing them apart.

“It wasn’t clear” from Southwest records, Ms. King said, if the two methods were used on the correct areas of the plane, so the planes were grounded until the work could be redone.

Each inspection took about 90 minutes at maintenance bases that Southwest operates in Dallas, Houston, Phoenix and Chicago, she said.

The F.A.A. is auditing Southwest’s maintenance records and the carrier is examining its own work, with help from an outside consultant.

Robert A. Sturgell, acting administrator of the F.A.A., met Wednesday with Gary C. Kelly, Southwest’s chief executive, for a briefing on the airline’s efforts.

Keeping current on required maintenance, including airworthiness directives from the F.A.A., involves a huge amount of paperwork and coordination at big airlines. Maintenance tasks often overlap, though procedures for completing one can be quite different than those for completing another.

“There are several airworthiness directives that cover the same piece of real estate on an airplane,” said John J. Goglia, a former board member at the National Transportation Safety Board, the agency that investigates accidents. “So, an airline creates a procedure where they’ll go in and do them all.”

But some airworthiness directives are on a different timetable, Mr. Goglia added, which can lead to skipped work and problems.

“What was unusual in the Southwest case was it went on for months,” he said. “That’s a concern.”

Southwest flew the 46 planes from June 2006 to March 2007 without having done the required inspections. Its initial reaction to the fine last week was combative. It called the inspection “routine and redundant” and asserted that “the F.A.A. approved of our actions.” This week, the airline has seemed more chastened.

Southwest is trying to attract more business travelers, which would let it collect more, on average, for each ticket sold. That involves selling corporate travel departments on the idea of flying Southwest.

Southwest is generally regarded as the best-run domestic airline. “They start off with a lot of money in the good will bank, and they make a really, really bad mistake,” said Kevin Mitchell, who runs the Business Travel Coalition. “Most travel managers will probably give them a pass once.”

Mr. Oberstar plans a hearing on the maintenance lapse and the F.A.A.’s handling of it April 3. The Transportation Department’s inspector general is investigating the F.A.A.’s oversight of Southwest.

Mr. Mitchell, whose group represents many corporate travel departments, said he was most worried about the agency’s failure to act like a regulator. In recent meetings he has attended on ways to better manage crowded New York air space, he said, F.A.A. officials constantly refer to airlines as “customers.”

“The culture there is dysfunctional,” he said.