
Everyone takes things personally, but David G. Neeleman is that rare corporate executive who admits to those feelings.

Yesterday, after months of being beaten up over the February service meltdown at the company he founded, JetBlue Airways, Mr. Neeleman heeded the urgings of his board and reluctantly agreed to step aside as chief executive.

Dave Barger, chief operating officer and longtime No. 2 at the airline, was named the new chief executive.

Mr. Neeleman — one of the more unusual leaders in corporate America, who talks often of his Mormon faith and the attention deficit disorder he suffers from — vowed to stay on as chairman, working full time on industry and regulatory issues and some long-term strategic matters for JetBlue.

But he promised to leave to Mr. Barger the running of the airline he started in 2000, with its signature low fares, leather seats and irreverent marketing.

“He’s the C.E.O. and I’ll respect that,” said Mr. Neeleman in a joint telephone interview with Mr. Barger.

The shift follows the mid-February disruption of JetBlue operations at Kennedy International Airport during an ice storm.

That left hundreds of passengers stranded for hours on airplanes away from the terminal, and thousands more inside the terminal who were unable to get to their destinations.

The carrier ended up canceling 1,200 flights over six days, lost $20 million in revenue because of the cancellations and had to hand out $24 million in flight vouchers in an effort to appease passengers.

Mr. Neeleman said at the time that he was “humiliated and mortified,” a statement that detractors found self-serving, while fans said it demonstrated unusual humility for a top executive.

Yesterday, he said of that episode and of smaller problems at JetBlue: “I take it so personally. It’s not healthy for me. It’s not healthy for the company. The February storm kind of convinced me that this operation can consume you. I don’t want to repeat that for a lot of reasons, including my personal health.”

Mr. Neeleman said that David Checketts, a JetBlue board member and friend, had led the effort to persuade the founder to step aside. “He is one who pointed a lot of these things out,” Mr. Neeleman said of Mr. Checketts. “I think every entrepreneur who starts a company and becomes enthralled with it is reluctant to step back.”

Roger King, an airline analyst at CreditSights, said he found the management transition remarkable for how swiftly it occurred after the February problems, and for the fact that Mr. Neeleman did not become angry and quit.

“A reasonable board — not your typical suck-up board,” Mr. King said. “It was inevitable. He’s a tremendous entrepreneur. But at some point these things get so big, you have to delegate.”

Mr. Neeleman helped build an earlier airline start-up, Morris Air, which was sold to Southwest Airlines in 1993 for $129 million. He started a second company, in the technology field, and sold that too for a sizable sum.

Mr. Neeleman, 49, owns 10.8 million JetBlue shares valued at about $118 million based on yesterday’s late trading price of $10.89. “I haven’t sold any,” Mr. Neeleman said. “At some point I have to start selling some shares.”

While continuing to work at JetBlue full time, he said, he plans to spend some time raising money for the Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney, a fellow Mormon. “You might see me popping up at a Mitt Romney event every now and then,” he said.

Mr. Barger, 49, takes over at a tough time for JetBlue and for the airline industry. Most airlines in recent weeks have reported slowing growth in demand for tickets, clouding the profit picture for the remainder of the year. JetBlue has a tough task in trying to fill its growing fleet with passengers in that environment. Delta Air Lines, newly emerged from bankruptcy, can be expected to become a more fierce competitor to JetBlue up and down the East Coast.

Gordon M. Bethune, former chief executive of Continental Airlines, where Mr. Barger worked before JetBlue, said the new chief would help with JetBlue’s growing pains. “Neeleman was smart to hire him when he did,” Mr. Bethune said. “He’ll do a great job.”

Mr. Barger said that stepping in for Mr. Neeleman, whose name and face are synonymous with JetBlue, would not be so hard because they have already worked together for nine years. During that time, Mr. Barger took over many duties from Mr. Neeleman. “We understand each other’s weaknesses, strengths,” he said. “We tend to finish each other’s sentences.”

JetBlue’s image, meanwhile, might be weathering the February meltdown better than expected. The airline became the butt of constant jokes by television comedians. And executives at competing airlines, who had never liked Mr. Neeleman’s unconventional style, took pleasure in comparing JetBlue to past start-ups that failed.

But yesterday, Linda Hirneise, who runs the travel practice at J. D. Power & Associates, a market research firm, said that recent customer satisfaction surveys by her firm indicated JetBlue “seems to have ratcheted back up” in passengers’ esteem after a short and small decline after the February mess.
