With the nasty summer air travel season just ended, it is time — past time, really — to start worrying about holiday travel plans. Expect absolutely full flights, making it next to impossible to quickly get on another flight if you are bumped, miss your flight or otherwise have to make new arrangements at the last minute.

Also, as always, expect delays, especially across the upper part of the country, from foul weather.

So, first and foremost, come prepared. Take water and food aboard with you, any medicine you might need in a delay, and a book or other diversion. Allow extra time to get through security because of crowds and an abundance of inexperienced fliers during the holidays.

If you can stand to fly on Thanksgiving or Christmas, you may find more seats available and at lower prices. Days to avoid, because of crowds and high fares, include the day before Thanksgiving, and the Sunday after. The weekends bracketing Christmas — it falls on a Tuesday this year — will also be tough.

For a more detailed search of air fares, online services like www.farecompare.com and www.farecast.com can help you find a good deal and to know when you are getting one. Services like www.flightstats.com and www.flightaware.com can help you gauge potential delays.

Some markets — including Detroit, Washington, Houston and Boston — have fewer seats available this year at Thanksgiving because airlines have reduced capacity in spots. Others — notably Orlando, San Francisco, Denver, Seattle and Las Vegas — have more seats available, according to FareCompare.

Perhaps the best strategy, according to Rick Seaney, chief executive of FareCompare, is to stay home this holiday season and consider international travel in 2008. That is when increased capacity — planes shifted from domestic flying and the first new deliveries of big new Boeing and Airbus planes — should combine to lead to lower fares.

“It’s going to be really good for international travel over the next year and a half,” Mr. Seaney said.