Workers at many airlines have been forced to take huge pay cuts in recent years, and they have watched 100,000 or so of their colleagues lose their jobs.

But for many of them, the industry’s financial woes have taken another toll: a sense of love lost for the business.

Some airline mechanics, for example, are fond of saying that they have jet fuel in their veins. For the Schalk family of Oceanside, N.Y., it even coursed through two generations. Until recently.

Charlie Schalk, now 75, was a bank teller trainee when he enlisted in the Air Force in 1951 and was sent to Newfoundland and taught to fix planes. He took his new wife, Joan, along and became smitten with the DC-3s he was overhauling. After his service, he fell for the Boeing 707 while working at Pan Am.

“I’ll never forget the day that screaming giant came rolling in,” Mr. Schalk said. “She was beautiful.”

His three sons inherited his love of planes, and became airline mechanics, too.

But as they approached middle age, the industry went into its steep downturn, and the joy they felt fixing planes turned to anger over the pay cuts, lost jobs and suddenly risky pensions. Each of the brothers vowed to start a new career.

“There’s no fun anymore,” said Glenn Schalk, 53, the oldest brother. He blames outsourcing by his employer, British Airways, for his sense of insecurity about his job as a mechanic at Kennedy International Airport near here.

He started his own business after hours, and watched his brothers take steps to start new careers, too. Then something unexpected happened: the romance of work, something the Schalks long thought was tied exclusively to fixing big jetliners, began to return.

“It’s fun,” Glenn Schalk said. “I can’t wait to get up in the morning and work in my business.”

He sells commemorative plaques, trophies and the like to companies, municipal agencies and professional sports teams.

And he now makes more from the business, DS Inc., than from his airline job, from which he hopes to retire next year (the brothers make $60,000 to $75,000 a year).

“I’m into being a businessman,” he said. “I like the respect.”
Video
More Video »

To be sure, many other airline workers have not managed the transition to other careers as well as the Schalks.

Many of those laid off landed in poorer-paying jobs. And those who have held onto their jobs lead a more stressful life, often with more work for lower pay, and with reduced retirement benefits.

Workers in the automobile industry, many of them car enthusiasts, are beginning to go through the same painful process — a wrenching separation from an industry that employed generations of families (unlike the airlines, Detroit automakers are offering retirement incentives).

The ranks of budding entrepreneurs among airline workers include Charles P. Foulkes, 40, who speaks five languages and has a graduate degree from Northwestern University. “I’m not an underachiever,” he said.

Still, Mr. Foulkes joined American Airlines in 1990 as a flight attendant and expected to make that his only job. After his pay was cut in 2003, Mr. Foulkes, who lives in Chicago, signed up for cooking school, then baking school.

The business he started, Crust Bread, sells naturally unleavened loaves for $4 to $10 each at gourmet shops and now accounts for about one third of his income.

He is trying to expand and now sees his airline work in a slightly different light, he said. “I want to do something more than fly around the world and serve Cokes,” he added.

Many airline employees start businesses that cater to fellow workers. Linda Pinka, a flight attendant at Southwest Airlines for 35 years, makes airline-themed jewelry. She estimated that about half the flight attendants she knows have a second source of income these days.

Richard Krutenat, a regional jet pilot for American Airlines, runs a business, DFWcrewhouse.com, which matches up landlords with pilots and flight attendants who need to rent a place to sleep near Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.

Mr. Krutenat, 36, started the business in 2002 to supplement his airline salary, which is now $80,000 a year. He has since been bitten by the entrepreneurial bug.

He bought a house of his own to rent out and more recently has been thinking about how to attract investors to develop dormitory-style housing. “I’ve tinkered with the idea of marketing it big time,” he said.

Pilots and flight attendants have more flexible schedules, which has always allowed them to work side jobs and start businesses. But as industry problems worsened, other airline workers found ways to moonlight.

“When I started it was just a handful of guys” working side jobs, said Brad Mueller, a crew chief who for 18 years has worked at American’s giant maintenance base in Tulsa, Okla., which employs about 7,000. Now, he estimated, close to 20 percent of the workers there have outside jobs.

Charlie Schalk, the father of the three brothers, worked as a mechanic and inspector at Pan Am until the airline’s demise in 1991. His Pan Am pension pays him just $883.95 a month, he said, which forced him and his wife to sell their Oceanside home and move to Hudson, Fla. (their son Chuck still lives in Oceanside; Glenn lives near him; and the third brother, Greg, lives near Atlanta).

Charlie Schalk in the Air Force in Newfoundland around 1953. He said seeing some of the planes was almost love at first sight.

From left, Glenn, Chuck Jr. and Greg Schalk enjoying a family get-together last week at Chuck’s home in Oceanside, N.Y.

“He was devastated,” said his wife, Joan. “Actually, we still grieve.”

He remains an airplane fan, playing flight simulator computer games each day and, whenever possible, quizzing his sons about their work.

But all three sons have told their children to avoid the airline business.

Glenn Schalk has fared best, since British Airways has not cut its workers’ pay. Fearing the airline might outsource maintenance, however, he started his trophy business around 2000. After Sept. 11, 2001, though, sales fell off sharply.

Having debt of about $100,000 from investing in his business, he sold United States flags and pins at Long Island train stations to make his loan payments.

But then he learned to create etched-glass plaques, using a laser, for corporate sales teams and other groups.

Recently, the Chicago Blackhawks hockey team hired him to turn scuffed-up Plexiglas from around the rink at its arena into plaques for season ticket holders.

He made etched paperweights for a charity fund-raiser last year held by a group associated with the Fire Department of New York. At the event, he met fire chiefs from around the country and has sold plaques to some of their departments.

His business debt grew to $300,000, but he has since paid it down to $140,000, he said.

“He does what the old salesmen used to do,” said Susan Wipper, an official at the FDNY Foundation. “He can’t do enough for you. I think he’s going to be very successful.”

Greg Schalk, 46, was among the Pan Am mechanics hired in 1991 when Delta Air Lines bought some Pan Am assets. In Delta’s recent bankruptcy, his pay and benefits were cut sharply.

He still works his three 12-hour shifts a week at Delta, but has followed his wife, Cheryl Bright Schalk, into residential real estate sales.

Mrs. Schalk has sold as many as 35 houses in a single year and regularly out-earns her husband. “I’m learning from the master,” Greg Schalk said. “There’s nothing like a house-hunting trip — people from out of town.”

They plan to consult a financial planner to help figure out how much longer Greg should stay at Delta.

Chuck Schalk, at 44 the youngest brother, jumped from Pan Am to American in 1990. But in 2003, his pay was reduced by 17.5 percent as employees made concessions to help the carrier avoid bankruptcy.

A union activist and inveterate writer of letters to the editor, he remains the angriest of the brothers about the lousy hand dealt airline workers He has occasionally been quoted in newspaper articles voicing his frustration with the industry.

“We don’t get the respect we deserve. It hurts,” the father of three said. “None of my boys is going into aviation. I’ll put a stop to it.”

He has chosen divorce mediation as his new career. Having watched co-workers and friends go through bitter and costly splits, he saw opportunity. “I’m looking for something to grow with,” he said.

Kenneth Neumann, the director of training at the Center for Mediation and Training in Manhattan, said he attracted students from all walks of life, but never an airline mechanic.

So when he saw Chuck Schalk’s application, he asked to meet the man, wanting to make sure his new student would be suited to brokering peace.

“He had such a different background,” Mr. Neumann said.

He concluded that the mechanic would make a good mediator and probably get a lot of clients. “He’s very eager, unbelievably motivated, extremely personable,” Mr. Neumann said. “He’s the kind of guy who’s going to get cases.”

Joan Schalk, wife to one mechanic and mother to three, hopes her sons establish themselves in their new careers before the next wave of layoffs and bankruptcies hit airline workers.

“They went through it with their father — they saw the tears,” she said. “They’re in middle age. Their fear is that one day they’ll go in and be walked out the door like their father.”