The parent company of American Airlines, the AMR Corporation, posted a $328 million first-quarter loss as surging fuel prices sent the industry into a downturn.

Gerard Arpey, the chief executive of American Airlines, leaving a stage last week after addressing flight cancellations. High fuel prices hurt its parent company’s first-quarter report.

Airlines got some more unwelcome news from the Transportation Department, which said Wednesday that, beginning in May, they will have to pay some bumped passengers as much as $800, double the current top penalty. The higher penalty also applies to planes of as few as 30 seats, rather than 60 seats or more under the old rule, which exempted many regional jets.

As airlines seek ways to remain financially viable, US Airways joined United Airlines and Continental Airlines on Wednesday in suggesting that it is interested in combining with another carrier. While none of the airlines have commented on specific talks, W. Douglas Parker, chief executive of US Airways, said in a letter to employees, “We can’t ignore what’s happening in the world around us.”

He noted that the proposed combination of Delta Air Lines and Northwest Airlines, announced on Monday, would create “a formidable competitor.”

Airlines are having limited success in raising fares, but have introduced a series of new fees, including extra charges for additional checked bags or heavy luggage, in an effort to raise revenue.

US Airways said on Wednesday that it would charge $5 to $30 to reserve about 8 percent of its more desirable coach seats, on the aisle or window near the front. It said the fee would vary with flight distance.

Also on Wednesday, Trans States Airlines, which flies regional jets for American, United and US Airways, canceled 94 of its scheduled 335 flights by midafternoon, temporarily grounding 24 planes in the latest instance of maintenance problems in the airline industry.

Bill Mishk, a spokesman for Trans States, said the groundings were voluntary. The company flies 48 regional jets.

Laura Brown, a spokeswoman for the Federal Aviation Administration, said Trans States, which operates from St. Louis, discovered a maintenance lapse involving the nose wheel system used to steer the Embraer-made planes while they are on the ground. She said Trans States was inspecting and fixing the systems and expected to have the jets in service again by Thursday morning.

The maintenance issue was not one looked into by the F.A.A., Ms. Brown said.

The big American Airlines loss, equal to $1.32 a diluted share, versus a year-ago profit of $81 million, or 30 cents a diluted share, shows how higher fuel prices are overwhelming the industry’s efforts to raise fares.

American’s fuel bill went up 45 percent over the year-ago quarter, to $2.05 billion. Its fares were up 5.1 percent, a strong gain, but not nearly enough to remain profitable.

Other carriers will report quarterly results soon.

Major airlines tried raising fares across the board 10 times in the first quarter, and were successful in getting the increases to stick on 6 of those occasions, said Rick Seaney, chief executive of FareCompare.com, a firm that tracks airfares.

The individual increases ranged from $4 to $50 a round trip, Mr. Seaney said.

That would seem to give a bigger boost to airline revenue. But as Lawrence W. Kellner, chief executive of Continental, complained to employees recently, discount airlines often did not match the increases. Consumers have become adept at shopping online for the best fare and many will alter travel plans to save money.

In reaction to the deteriorating condition of the industry, American said it would accelerate the replacement of its fuel-guzzling MD-80s with more efficient Boeing 737-800s and would cut domestic capacity again.

And it agreed to sell all but 10 percent of its money management unit, American Beacon Advisors, to private equity firms for $480 million.