Delta Air Lines said yesterday that its chief executive, Gerald Grinstein, who has shepherded the carrier through reorganization, would not receive any stock, incentive payments or severance when the company exits bankruptcy protection this spring.

Mr. Grinstein, 74, is expected to retire once a new board chooses a chief executive. His two top lieutenants, Edward H. Bastian, chief financial officer, and James M. Whitehurst, chief operating officer, will each receive stock packages valued at $8.4 million that include restricted shares, options and share grants tied to performance, Delta said. The stock compensation vests over three years.

The packages announced yesterday are aimed at returning to employees some of the compensation lost through pay cuts and to give workers an incentive as Delta exits bankruptcy, possibly as early as next month.

Mr. Bastian and Mr. Whitehurst are both considered candidates for the chief executive’s job, though that choice will be made by a new board chosen by unsecured creditors whose claims will convert into most of the airline’s new stock.

Five executive vice presidents will each get stock packages valued at $6.2 million. Over all, 1,200 managers will share 2.4 percent of the new shares to be distributed, valued at $240 million in projections that estimate the airline’s market capitalization postbankruptcy at $10 billion.

Delta’s 39,000 front-line workers who are not represented by a union will share 3.5 percent of the new stock, valued at $350 million, receive cash bonuses equal to 8 percent of their 2006 pay, or a combined $130 million, and will also receive raises totaling $60 million.

The airline also said that it expected to distribute $170 million in profit sharing to workers, based on its 2007 financial expectations.

Workers and managers at Delta went through two rounds of pay and benefit reductions, as has most of the airline industry. Delta pilots, the only major worker group represented by a union, will also receive shares in exchange for contract concessions.