The extreme low-fare airline, already well established in Europe, will try for a comeback in the United States on May 22 with a well-financed start-up, Skybus Airlines, beginning service that day and promising at least 10 seats on every flight priced at $10 one-way — before taxes.

If it sounds like People Express and Laker Airways — low-price carriers that made a splash, expanded too fast and then collapsed — there are similarities.

But the organizers of Skybus are counting on the $160 million cushion that they have raised and on a big change in consumer behavior to help the carrier follow the success of Ryanair, the Irish airline. Ryanair brought ultracheap fares to much of Europe, charging fees for many extras and transforming the short-haul market there.

Like Ryanair, Skybus, based in Columbus, Ohio, is charging extra for many items — $5 to check a bag, $10 for a preferred seat, $2 for a soft drink — and it aims to sell a lot of the stuff. Carrying food on board is not allowed, according to Skybus’s Web site, “unless you brought enough for the whole plane.”

The airline will sell tickets only through its Web site, avoiding the expense of maintaining a reservations call center or paying a sales commission to travel agents. Skybus is also outsourcing its maintenance, the staffing of ticket counters at airports and its baggage handling, all to keep costs low.

“Don’t call us,” the Web site explains. “We don’t have a phone number.”

Low-fare airlines have failed in the past, but not necessarily because of their fare structure. People Express expanded too fast, as did Laker. Ryanair has been very successful.

Skybus’s success will depend heavily on the overall health of the air travel market. As the market grows, there is room for many approaches, so long as they are well managed.

As its planes age and its workers grow more senior, Skybus’s costs will rise. And low fares or not, it will need to increase revenue, a lesson JetBlue recently learned.

The unbundling of the airline service may seem like crass nickel-and-diming, but it is a reaction to consumer behavior in the Internet era. From the beginning, travelers scoured the Web for the absolute cheapest fares with a vigor that has concerned traditional airline executives, disregarding meals and other extras that airlines tossed in.

So, to survive in that environment, older airlines gave up meal service and some other extras, cut workers’ wages and benefits and, after a while, their domestic service did not seem much different than service offered by low-fare carriers.

For the low fares, said Bill Diffenderffer, Skybus’s chief executive, “we want to give exactly what the customer wants, and nothing more.”

Skybus’s top walk-up fare will be $330 one way, before taxes. But it has many very low fares — $40, $50, $75 — one way, before taxes.

Initially, Skybus will connect Columbus to Burbank, Calif., near Los Angeles; Portsmouth, N.H., near Boston; Bellingham, Wash., near Seattle; Kansas City, Mo.; Richmond, Va.; Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; and Greensboro, N.C. In June, flights are planned to Oakland, Calif.

In the first three hours the Skybus Web site was up with fare information yesterday, Mr. Diffenderffer said 30,000 tickets were sold.

Skybus currently has four leased Airbus 319s, which carry 144 passengers, with four more expected by the end of the year. And it has an agreement to acquire 65 planes directly from Airbus beginning in late 2008 with deliveries through 2012. That is similar to a growth plan that made JetBlue a major airline in just a few years.

Airline rivals often react harshly to new competition by reducing fares and adding flights. And in Columbus, Skybus has a lot of competition: Southwest, with about 22 percent of the market, according to the Columbus Regional Airport Authority; Delta at 17 percent; US Airways at 16 percent; American at 14 percent; as well as flights by JetBlue, Northwest Airlines and Continental Airlines.

None of Skybus’s announced routes compete directly against Southwest, Mr. Diffenderffer noted. And he contended that Skybus would create demand rather than take customers away from existing carriers. But with Skybus’s aggressive growth plans, other airlines would soon feel challenged.

On Skybus, “other than using the restroom, everything comes with a fee,” said Brandy King, a spokeswoman for Southwest. “The $10 is only the price of entry.” She noted that Southwest, too, was seeking to raise fees — but said it would only do so for additional services, not ones it already offers.
