If everything goes perfectly — and that is a big if — the airline industry could report record profits this year.

Be warned, though, airline stocks are mostly speculative investments, and it is easier to lose money than to make it, given the industry’s past performance.

The Air Transport Association, an airline trade group, expects industry profits to be $4 billion this year, which is an improvement over modest operating profits last year. But some analysts think that the industry could top the record of about $5.4 billion in profit, set in 1999.

Those profit projections, and a recent decline in airline shares, have some analysts recommending airline stocks as cheap and likely to rally as profits pile up.

“It’s time to buy the airlines again,” Bob McAdoo, an analyst at the Prudential Equity Group, told clients in a March report. He has perhaps the most bullish view among Wall Street airline analysts, with 2007 profit projections that would easily set an industry record.

Even with just a modest industry recovery thus far, some airline stocks have staged remarkable advances. American Airlines, for those prescient enough to snatch up shares near the bottom of $1.25 in March 2003, hit $41 recently. They closed yesterday at $30.33 a share.

Continental Airlines, at $3.65 in October 2002, hit $52.40 recently. Yesterday, the stock closed at $36.05. And US Airways more than tripled after its September 2005 stock offering, to $63.27, before settling back in recent weeks. It finished yesterday’s trading at $45.05.

While those are impressive gains, a bet on Delta Air Lines or Northwest Airlines, which both filed for bankruptcy protection in September 2005, meant a total wipeout for investors.

But as Delta and Northwest plan to exit bankruptcy proceedings in coming months, they will convert creditors’ claims into new stock. Initial estimates put Delta’s market capitalization at $10 billion and Northwest’s at $8 billion.

United Airlines, a unit of the UAL Corporation, emerged from bankruptcy a little more than a year ago with new shares of its own.

The bankruptcies, along with efforts by airlines not in bankruptcy, have drastically reduced labor costs and some other expenses. A sharp reduction in the combined fleets of big carriers, meanwhile, curbed capacity just as a growing economy stimulated demand for airline tickets. So planes are mostly full and airlines have been able to raise fares — by about 15 percent last year alone.

All of that has meant profits again for an industry that racked up more than $30 billion of losses after Sept. 11. Last year, with the exception of big reorganization charges that produced losses at Delta and Northwest, was a modestly profitable year.

If oil prices spike again, or the economy falters, profits could be modest once more this year.

Mr. McAdoo, the Prudential analyst, is an optimist, and he would have to be, spending more than 30 years either working for airlines — he was chief executive of a start-up, Vanguard Airlines, in the mid-1990s — or following their stocks on Wall Street. In the early years of every decade of his career, the industry has swooned.

Mr. McAdoo projected that American Airlines would record profit of $1.85 billion this year, roughly $500 million higher than some other analysts’ estimates. And he put an $88 target price for later this year on US Airways, implying a 95 percent leap from yesterday’s close.

Supporting his generally upbeat view, very few new planes are scheduled for delivery to domestic airlines this year or next, which should keep capacity tight and possibly allow further fare increases. The economy, though not roaring at this point, continues to grow and that typically means strong demand for airline tickets. And airlines continued to reduce costs during 2006, so the industry enters this year leaner as a whole.

Even Philip Baggaley, who, as a debt analyst at Standard & Poor’s, is paid to worry about the downside of the airlines, said, “It’ll be the best year since the 1990s, unless the economy really falls out of bed.”

But on the horizon, probably in time for another beginning-of-decade slump, are signs of trouble. Labor unions representing pilots, flight attendants, mechanics and others are growing restive as they watch some airline executives collect big pay packages not so long after union members surrendered as much as one-third of their compensation to keep carriers afloat.

Glenn F. Tilton, chief executive of United, for instance, received 2006 compensation the company valued at $23.8 million. Most United workers are locked into concessionary contracts through the end of the decade, though they are already making noises about raises, and other airline contracts are due for renegotiation sooner.

“It’s not clear the new, lower cost structure can last until 2010,” Mr. Baggaley said.

Carriers also need to freshen their fleets, and that could be expensive.

With balance sheets still laden with debt, most airlines will remain extremely vulnerable to a slowdown. That will tend to make their stocks volatile. In other words, yes, investors make money on airline stocks, but typically not by holding the shares for the long haul.

And for investors who wished they had bought at the bottom, be patient: those prices may return.