It may look like chicken feed in this era of mammoth executive pay packages, but a combined $21 million in stock payouts to five top executives at American Airlines is looming large in labor talks with pilots still angry about pay concessions made four years ago.

The stock bonuses, which are to be paid April 19 and include shares valued yesterday at about $7.5 million for Gerard J. Arpey, chief executive of American, are the subject of angry countdowns on two employee Web sites and can be precisely calculated based on the stock price at the moment on a third employee site.

“When the ship was sinking, it was, ‘We’re all in this together,’ ” said Drew Keith, director of industry analysis for the Allied Pilots Association, the union representing American’s pilots. Now, he said, the pilots are angry to see executives benefiting from American’s nascent recovery while those flying the airplanes continue to get reduced wages.

Mr. Arpey declined to be interviewed.

American faces negotiations with its two other big unions: the Association of Professional Flight Attendants in early 2008 and the Transport Workers Union, which represents mechanics and other ground workers, in November of this year.

The carrier has higher labor costs than most of its competitors because it did not go through bankruptcy, the approach some airlines took to extract a second round of pay concessions after Sept. 11, 2001.

Now that American is profitable and its finances are improving, it does not have the threat of bankruptcy to use to push for concessions, as it did in 2003.

Across the industry, as airlines become profitable again, workers are agitating to recover some of the pay and benefits lost in recent years. Delta Air Lines has already promised its nonunion workers a raise when it exits bankruptcy this spring, hoping to buy some peace and avoid unionization beyond its pilots.

Pilots are seeking a big raise after a turnaround at US Airways. And United Airlines pilots, whose contract is not amendable until January 2010, are complaining about executive compensation there and preparing to demand raises.

American, a unit of the AMR Corporation and based in Fort Worth, is the only traditional major network airline never to have entered bankruptcy. Its employees’ pensions are intact, and their wages are generally higher than at other traditional airlines, though they lag those at Southwest Airlines.

At the same time, management pay in the airline industry generally is lower than compensation at other big companies — with good reason. Airlines mostly lose money. And their shares, over time, have been poor investments.

Still, it irks executives to be running a huge and well-known company and be paid far less than other executives. Another Dallas area service industry company with about $20 billion in sales, the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, paid its chief executive, Michael H. Jordan, cash, stock and other compensation valued at $13.6 million last year.

In 2005, the last year with full pay information available, Mr. Arpey was paid cash and stock then valued at about $1.5 million. (He declined his payout from the bonus program last year, but this year it will pay him about $7.5 million.)

While executives in general view their pay relative to that of other executives, workers view executive pay relative to rank-and-file wages, especially at companies where workers made sacrifices to keep the place in business.

“I’m so tired of management hiding behind ‘Everybody else does it,’ ” said Tommie Hutto-Blake, president of the flight attendants’ union at American.

“I really do feel American and its unions could be headed toward a collision,” Ms. Hutto-Blake said. “We’re sliding fast. It’s executive compensation — it sucks the energy out of you.”

“How do I keep my people pumped up” to offer good service, she asked, when flight attendants are angry about their reduced pay and management’s bonuses?

The executive stock bonuses are large because they are based on AMR’s stock price roughly from the start of 2004 to the end of 2006, when it rose to $30, from about $13. Also, the bonus program pays out more if AMR shares outperform those of other airlines. With Delta and Northwest Airlines in bankruptcy, and other airline stocks not rising as rapidly as AMR’s, the company ranked first during that period.

In all, about 1,000 managers will split roughly $170 million in AMR shares.

This Thursday, Mr. Arpey and other top executives will have their monthly meeting with American’s top union officials. As at other meetings, said Jeffrey J. Brundage, senior vice president for human relations at American, there will be “a very robust dialogue about how we should share the fruits of our labor.”

Of negotiations with the pilots’ union, Mr. Brundage said, “Quite frankly, it’s been slow going.”