Even before the recent flight cancellations, airlines and passengers were facing a new wave of travel misery.

A woman waited at La Guardia Airport in New York City on Wednesday to rebook after flight cancellations by American Airlines.

Record-high fuel prices and the industry’s fragile finances have led to a new round of bankruptcies among smaller carriers in recent weeks, including ATA Airlines, Skybus and Aloha Airgroup.

Bigger airlines are shrinking their fleets to cut fuel costs, even as demand for travel remains strong — meaning flights are growing more crowded and unpleasant.

And layoffs are beginning again for a business that, to many of its customers, is already suffering service problems. It feels that way to airline workers, too, and as the industry’s decline accelerates, passengers can expect harried and grumpy gate agents and flight attendants.

Moreover, all across the air travel system in the United States, equipment — air traffic control systems, airplanes, airline computer systems — is aging and in many cases overtaxed. That means breakdowns and weather problems become more disruptive.

In the near term, airlines cannot raise fares fast enough to cover rising fuel costs; oil settled at a record price on Wednesday, $110.87 a barrel. That has plunged the industry back into the red after a brief two-year run of profits. A Merrill Lynch analyst, Michael Linenberg, expects the industry to lose $1.9 billion this year.

One bad sign: a handful of airline shares are cheaper (Frontier, $1.79; Expressjet, $2.21; Mesa Air, 96 cents) than an airport beer.

Years of cost-cutting on maintenance and, to some critics, a lax regulatory approach by the Federal Aviation Administration, appear to be catching up with domestic airlines and their customers.

American Airlines and its domestic competitors have been scaling back maintenance spending for years. Some airlines sent work overseas in search of cheaper labor. Some also cut wages of mechanics in the United States and reduced their number. Others quickened the pace of work at maintenance facilities.

“They let too many people go,” said Kevin Cornwell, an MD-80 captain at American who is also a pilots union official. “They sold spare parts years ago to raise cash. Things don’t get fixed as fast.”

The industry’s biggest problem is the price of jet fuel. It follows the price of oil, which has more than doubled since dropping to $52 a barrel in January 2007.

With current air fares, a lot of planes simply cannot operate profitably. Though airlines raised fares on a broad scale 10 times in the first quarter of 2008, four of those increases failed to hold. And on many routes, the increases that did hold were ineffective because discount airlines had refused to match the increases.

Southwest Airlines, the most influential carrier on domestic fares, raised its average fare just 2 percent last year, to $106.60. And consumers have become surprisingly adept at shopping on the Internet for the lowest fare, frustrating the industry.

So major carriers like Northwest Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Airlines have responded in part by grounding older, fuel-guzzling planes.

But the planes most vulnerable to higher fuel prices may be regional jets that seat 50 or fewer passengers. Smaller jets became more prominent in recent years as major carriers withdrew their larger planes from many smaller markets.

Most of the smaller jets are operated by regional airlines under contract to major carriers. And the major carriers are looking for ways to rid themselves of some of these money-losing arrangements.

Mike Boyd, an aviation consultant, expects the North American fleet of 1,675 regional jets to begin shrinking this year to 1,042 by 2013. That would reduce service to many smaller cities and could eliminate flights to some markets altogether.

American said in November that it wanted to sell or spin off its American Eagle unit, which operates about 200 of the smaller, less efficient jets. No buyer has publicly emerged.

Continental Airlines scaled back contracts with Expressjet, cutting 69 regional jets. Trying to fly most of those planes under it own name, Expressjet lost $70.2 million last year versus a profit of $92.6 million in 2006. Even with low ticket prices, it was able to sell only 56 percent of the seats on those planes.

And Delta last month told Mesa Air it planned to cancel an agreement paying Mesa to fly about three dozen regional jets.

“There’s no place to put those planes,” said Mr. Boyd, the consultant.

“It’s like a dead-end plane,” added Roger King, an analyst at CreditSights. “The 50-seat jets are not economic in this high-fuel environment.”

Some major carriers think merging will be their salvation. Delta and Northwest appear to be in talks again about a combination.

For passengers, however, such a deal could hold a big downside. Some business travelers who range far and wide would be able to travel more through a single airline, and perhaps more cheaply.

But a merger, especially at current fuel prices, would probably lead to fewer combined flights in some markets, making the remaining planes more crowded.