Southwest Airlines found small cracks on 4 of the 38 planes it briefly grounded Wednesday, returning the other 34 planes to service. On Thursday, it resumed a normal schedule re than 3,400 flights a day.

Southwest found cracks in 4 planes, but returned 34 to service Thursday. The F.A.A. proposed a fine for maintenance lapses.

A $10.2 million fine proposed a week ago by the Federal Aviation Administration for maintenance lapses at Southwest has regulators and the carrier conducting intense side-by-side examinations of its safety records and procedures.

The episode has also brought the F.A.A. under scrutiny because a local official signed off a year ago on Southwest’s continuing to fly 46 planes for about a week after the carrier had reported that it could have missed an inspection deadline.

Southwest has stumbled in its initial reactions to the government scrutiny, which includes a Congressional investigation involving two F.A.A. inspectors who have become whistle-blowers.

Initially combative, Southwest has moderated its tone, with its chief executive, Gary C. Kelly, meeting the agency’s acting administrator, Robert A. Sturgell, on Wednesday and apologizing.

“We apologized to the F.A.A. We acknowledged we can do better,” Ron Ricks, executive vice president for law, airports and public affairs at Southwest, said. He said Southwest hoped to use an “informal conference process,” rather than some more adversarial forum, to settle with the F.A.A. both on the proposed fine and on Southwest’s approach to maintenance.

Southwest suspended three of its maintenance officials.

The four planes having what Southwest called short, hairline cracks will be fixed and be back in service this weekend, a spokeswoman, Beth Harbin, said. They were among 44 Boeing 737s that Southwest decided to reinspect after combing through maintenance records this week.

An F.A.A. airworthiness directive in 2002 ordered inspection of fuselage areas around the windows — some to be performed visually and some with eddy current, an electrical process used to examine metal structures without tearing them apart.

However, Southwest had replaced some fuselage panels subject to the testing. And on those panels, which were thicker in spots, the carrier could not get an eddy current reading.

It called Boeing and consulted the F.A.A., eventually using eddy current exams in the areas it could and, by agreement, visually inspecting elsewhere. “We didn’t miss inspections,” Mr. Ricks said. “We were attempting to find the right way to do the inspections.”

With the fine and scrutiny, the carrier and others are moving deliberately. “It took hours,” Mr. Ricks said, to get an answer from Boeing on how to proceed.

A separate maintenance issue under scrutiny by the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, meanwhile, involving the inspection on 70 737s of a back-up system to control a rudder in case the primary system fails arose because of mistaken reading of maintenance records, Mr. Ricks said.

The system was initially supposed to be inspected every 12,500 flight hours. In March 2006, Southwest, after never finding a failure of the system from 1999 to that date, asked the F.A.A. if it could lengthen the interval to every 20,000 flight hours, or about every six years. The F.A.A. agreed, Mr. Ricks said.

But a Southwest official, relying on a summary of maintenance intervals that had failed to include the adjustment to 20,000 hours, reported to the F.A.A. that Southwest had fallen behind on inspections. “The required inspections were performed,” Mr. Ricks said.

He acknowledged that Southwest had to do better in some areas, including its record keeping. But said that Southwest’s “redundant, comprehensive and overlapping systems” provide protection against human errors. The airline has said repeatedly that its planes are safe.

Southwest is generally regarded as the best-run domestic airline, and Mr. Ricks said that may have contributed to its initial reaction to the F.A.A. fine and scrutiny, which appeared combative.

“We have no experience in crisis of this magnitude,” he said.

In December 2005, a Southwest plane slid off a runway at Chicago Midway, killing a 6-year-old boy riding in a car when the plane broke through a fence and ran into an intersection.