American Airlines, the airline owned by the AMR Corporation, said late Tuesday that it expected to cancel as many as 500 flights Ñ more than a fifth of its daily total Ñ to reinspect its fleet of 300 MD-80 jetliners to make sure a wiring bundle in the wheel wells was stowed properly.

More cancellations are expected Wednesday, though American did not know how many because its work on the planes was continuing into the night.

The same wiring bundles caused American to cancel hundreds of flights two weeks ago after inspectors from the Federal Aviation Administration raised questions about how the bundles were secured inside wheel wells. American thought it had put the problem behind it then.

But Monday, in Tulsa, Okla., and at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, F.A.A. inspectors returned and Òfound MD-80s in noncompliance,Ó a spokeswoman for the agency, Laura Brown, said.

The latest inspections were part of the second phase of an industrywide examination of compliance with safety directives. The examination has found compliance problems and caused flight cancellations at other airlines, including Southwest Airlines and United Airlines.

ÒWe regret and apologize that we are once again causing inconvenience to our customers,Ó the chief executive, Gerard J. Arpey, said in a written statement.

ÒThe F.A.A. raised additional concerns,Ó American said in a statement, that went beyond directions that the airline received two weeks ago. ÒSpecifically, some areas of concern included the spacing of the ties on the wiring bundle and the direction in which the retention clips and lacing cords were facing.Ó

Two weeks ago, explaining the initial inspections, American said the work could take several hours a plane. An American spokesman, Tim Wagner, said the decision to ground and reinspect the entire MD-80 fleet was made midafternoon Tuesday, after consulting with F.A.A. officials.

Planes will return to service after being inspected and having any required work done, Mr. Wagner said. Had American grounded the huge MD-80 fleet the entire day, more than 1,000 flights would have been canceled.