 After Harry Truman repeatedly failed to persuade Congress to pass universal health insurance, some Truman administration officials came up with a less ambitious idea. They suggested covering only 8 percent of the population, and an especially sympathetic 8 percent at that: everybody 65 and older.

Truman never really pushed the plan, however. John F. Kennedy later did, yet was stymied by Congress and the American Medical Association, which equated it with Soviet-like socialism. So it fell to Lyndon Johnson. Even after he won a 23-point landslide in 1964, he had to agree to some unseemly deal-making, as Jonathan Cohn of The New Republic has noted, that handed a big payday to hospitals and doctors.

Only then, in the summer of 1965, was Medicare born.

Next week, Congress will return to session, and health care, of course, will be at the top of its agenda. Passing a bill, it's clear, will be no easier than in previous decades. President Obama's poll numbers have fallen, while untruths about death panels have made the rounds and members of Congress have been subjected to town hall harangues.

But the job facing Mr. Obama hasn't really changed: he will have to figure out how to end up more like Johnson than like Truman or, more recently, Bill Clinton. He and Congress will have to figure out how to make some progress toward fixing the country's troubled health care system.

Any bill they pass will inevitably be flawed. It will not do enough to reduce wasteful spending. It probably will not result in universal coverage. Special interests -- like drug companies and, once again, hospitals -- will get off too lightly.

But such is politics. Starting from scratch with a more purely liberal bill or a more conservative one, as some have urged, won't change the messy reality of democracy. ''You're not going to fix health care on one bill,'' Senator Mark Warner, a Virginia Democrat, said. ''Even if my most liberal colleagues had their perfect bill, it's not going to fix health care. A bill is going to have to be altered and amended later.''

Indeed, from an economic standpoint, the biggest risk seems to be that health care will be left unchanged and that we'll simply pretend we are as healthy, wealthy and wise as can be.

We're not. The United States is the only rich country in the world without something resembling universal health insurance. Medical costs already take a big whack out of workers' paychecks, and Medicare's budget is growing at an unsustainable rate. Despite all this spending, we too often receive inadequate care.

Emergency room care and certain cancer treatments are among the best in the world. But management of chronic diseases isn't nearly as good. Senior citizens and children are less likely to receive vaccinations here than in some other wealthy countries, a recent analysis found. Americans face higher risks of being killed by a medical error or harmed by a medication error.

Health reform won't solve all these problems. But there is still reason to think that it can improve things. A limited, imperfect, warts-and-all bill would, as in 1965, be a lot better than no bill at all.

The main political problem with health reform is still the immediate cost of it. Covering the uninsured will require $1.2 trillion or so over 10 years, and Congress hasn't been able to agree on $1.2 trillion of spending cuts and tax increases to keep the deficit from growing.

This standard -- deficit neutrality -- may not be fair. George W. Bush, after all, spent trillions of dollars cutting taxes and adding a Medicare prescription drug benefit without offsetting the costs. Yet given the current size of the deficit, Mr. Obama and Congress have to do better. 