 Slowing the growth of medical spending should, in principle, be one of the more popular parts of health reform. Health care already costs the typical household about $15,000 a year, and these costs are growing far more quickly than incomes. Yet when it comes time to turn principle into policy, the same problem always crops up.

Most of that $15,000 is deducted from people’s paychecks, as taxes or insurance premiums, before they ever have a chance to spend it — or to miss it. The health care they receive in exchange for the $15,000, however, is tangible. It’s a doctor’s visit, an X-ray or a surgical procedure that feels crucial to their well-being.

So we end up with a conundrum. We want health spending to slow, just not our own: My health care is a benefit; yours is a cost.

The A.F.L.-C.I.O. and its member unions have served up an excellent example of this contradiction over the last few weeks. They have been fighting to defeat the so-called Cadillac tax — a tax on very generous, expensive health insurance plans. And they’ve been getting help from big business’s lobbyists, like the Chamber of Commerce, who tend to be hostile to any new tax. We’ll find out in coming days whether the proposal survives the Senate Finance Committee’s markup of its health bill.

The Cadillac tax has the potential to slow health costs significantly. But like every other idea to slow spending, it can also sound downright scary. Just think of the proposal to have the government pay for end-of-life counseling, which turned into a debate over “death panels.”

This means the Cadillac tax isn’t just important in its own right. It’s also a preview of a battle that we’ll be fighting for years.

Medical costs really are rising at an unsustainable rate. If their current growth rate continues, they will bankrupt Medicare or require crushing tax increases. We need to find ways to cut back, and it can’t just be the other guy who’s affected.

Union leaders don’t even like the name Cadillac tax. They say, correctly, that the tax wouldn’t fall only on chief executives, investment bankers and the like. It would fall on some members of the middle class, especially unionized workers with generous health coverage.

The leading proposal in the Finance Committee would apply to family insurance plans that cost roughly $21,000 and up starting in 2013. For the sake of fairness, the threshold would vary based on geography and the average age of a company’s work force. In all, something like 10 percent of plans would be subject to the tax in 2013, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a research group.

But the number of affected plans would grow over time. The Senate has been talking about having the threshold rise each year by the inflation rate plus one percentage point. Since medical spending has been rising much faster than inflation, more and more plans would probably cross the threshold in the years after 2013. Over the next decade, the Congressional Budget Office has estimated that the tax would pay as much as 25 percent of the cost of extending coverage to the uninsured.

“People are going to see this as a huge middle-class tax hit,” argues Gerald Shea, an A.F.L.-C.I.O. official overseeing its health lobbying.

Insurance companies — technically the targets of the tax — would pass on the cost to employers, and employers would presumably pass it on to workers. The cost of insurance could rise. Or perhaps more likely, companies would stop offering such generous plans.

Here’s the big question, though: Would that be so bad?

Currently, the health insurance you get from your employer isn’t taxed, unlike almost all the rest of your compensation. So employers and workers have both fallen in love with generous plans. If an employer pays a worker an extra $100 in income, the worker may keep only $75 of it, while the government will get $25 in taxes. But if the employer puts that $100 toward health insurance, the worker will get all of it.

This tax break causes us to buy more health insurance than we would if the playing field for taxes were level, much as the tax breaks for housing helped inflate the real estate bubble. In effect, the tax-free treatment is a subsidy for health insurers, doctors and hospitals. It encourages wasteful spending — the extra M.R.I., the brand-name drug that’s no better than a generic, the cardiac-stent procedure that has no evidence of extending life (but does have some risk).

If the Cadillac tax started to eat away at the this tax break, you could expect three things to happen.

First, employees would shy away from the most expensive plans. The evidence is pretty clear on this: when workers bear some portion of the cost of insurance, their choices change.

In the 1990s, the University of California began charging its janitors, secretaries, professors and other employees a monthly fee for their health insurance plan — unless they chose the least expensive one. Many switched out of the most expensive plans, often to save as little as $10 a month, notes the economist Thomas Buchmueller. The change also led insurers to compete harder for people’s business, improving the quality of the cheapest plans at the expense of the insurers’ profit margins.

Second, the most generous insurance plans really would become less generous, but the change would probably do nothing to harm people’s health. The distinguishing feature of these gold-plated plans tends to be their lack of co-payments. The $20,400 family plan that a typical New Hampshire state employee has, for instance, includes free M.R.I.’s, as The Boston Globe has reported. And when M.R.I.’s are free, people tend to get more of them than their well-being requires.

The most comprehensive study of health insurance, by the RAND Corporation, bears this out. People with Cadillac plans are no healthier than people with Chevy Malibu plans. (Similarly, Americans are no healthier than citizens of rich countries that spend far less on medical care.) “Taking someone who’s uninsured and giving them insurance unambiguously improves their health,” says Jonathan Gruber, a health economist at M.I.T., “but taking someone who’s well-insured and making them really well-insured doesn’t make them any healthier.”

Finally, we can expect that a Cadillac tax will, in the long run, increase workers’ incomes. The money companies spend on health insurance, after all, doesn’t come from nowhere. The more they spend on insurance, the less that’s available for wage increases. This is why wage increases are often meager when insurance premiums are growing quickly, as has been the case over the last seven years or so.

When asked about the potential benefits of a Cadillac tax — better wage growth and less wasteful medical spending, with no damage to health — labor officials tend to dismiss them as the stuff of airy economic theory. But they’re not.

The slow wage growth and spiraling health costs of recent years are not theoretical. The fact that people with Cadillac plans aren’t healthier than people with merely good insurance isn’t theoretical. The difference between what this country spends on medicine and what other countries spend isn’t theoretical.

There is no question that a Cadillac tax would be somewhat unpleasant for people with Cadillac plans. It could increase their insurance costs or force them into less generous plans.

By opposing the tax, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. is simply doing its job. It is defending the interests of its members who have such plans — just as business groups are defending the interests of their members. That is what special interests do: look out for their own constituents, even at the expense of the national interest.